<title>ADCP/REP/80/14 - Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Outline Research Programmes </title>
<section>1</section>
PART I - OUTLINE RESEARCH PROGRAMMES FOR THE LEAD CENTRES IN INDIA AND THAILAND
PREFACE
A. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, DHAULI (BHUBANESWAR) INDIA
B. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, BANGKOK, THAILAND
PREFACE
One of the major objectives of the UNDP/FAO project for the establishment of a Regional Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia is the organization of systems-oriented multidisciplinary research for solving the problems faced in the wider application of production or farming systems that have been selected by the countries of the region for large-scale aquaculture development (see Aquaculture Planning in Asia - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Asia, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-17 October 1975. ADCP/REP/76/2: 154 p). It was intended as a support service along with training of key personnel and information dissemination, to accelerate investment in the aquaculture sector and increase production in a reasonably short period of time. Under the project's work plan, one of the first activities proposed was 'the detailed planning of research in the Lead Centres with the help of a team of experts' and identification of the facilities and equipment required for the
implementation of the proposed research.
The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), responsible for the organization of the regional project, fielded a task force consisting of the following members to carry out these preparatory activities, in respect of two of the Lead Centres: viz. the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Bangkok, Thailand, and the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre of the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute in Dhauli (Bhubaneswar), Orissa, India:
Dr. N. Fijan
(Yugoslavia)
Dr. J. Olah
(Hungary)
Dr. V.R.P. Sinha
(India)
Dr. P. Suraswade
(Thailand)
Dr. V. Varikul
(Thailand)
Mr. R. Neal
(U.S.A.) (for Thailand only)
Dr. B. Hepher
(Israel) (for India only)
Mrs. M. Delmendo
(FAO) (for Thailand only)
Dr. K.W. Chow
(FAO)
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
(FAO)
Dr. Michael New and Dr. Alex Fedoruk, FAO/UNDP experts working in Thailand, also participated in the discussions and research programme formulation in Thailand.
The task force spent considerable time with the research and extension staff of the two institutions and other agencies concerned; some field visits were made to supplement the information collected through informal and free discussions.
Both the institutions designated as Lead Centres have a wide range of activities, but the farming systems selected for research are high-priority interest items to them as well as the region as a whole. However, there are some significant differences in the involvement of scientific staff in research in the two institutions. The scientific staff of the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Bangkok combines technical services and extension work with research, whereas research and extension work, are to a large extent separated in the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute in India. The task force did not, therefore, attempt to formulate a uniform approach to research within the two institutions. Instead, programmes were recommended that can be carried out within the existing framework, with possible strengthening and external assistance. In each case, the benefits that can be derived by the host country and the other participating countries of the region, within a
reasonably short period of time, were given special consideration.
Although many problems worthy of research could be identified for each aquaculture system, an attempt was made to determine priorities. The research proposals are limited to areas that promise the greatest short-term and medium-term benefits. A major consideration in the formulation of research programmes was the feasibility of the application of improved technologies developed as a result of the proposed research. The general time-frame used for planning was a two-year start-up period followed by a five-year period of concentrated research The task force has limited itself to suggesting research approaches. The actual detailed design of experiments and observations will, naturally, be the responsibility of the multidisciplinary teams to be established for research on each farming system or specified research aspect. It is expected that the services of senior consultants can be made available to assist in this task, as well as to initiate the research programme. If required,
external expertise may have to be made available during the course of the investigations and towards the end of the start-up period to evaluate the work and suggest any needed changes in priorities and future approaches.
Even though the task force has, in every case, recommended a multi-disciplinary systems approach to research aimed at improving selected farming systems, it has also considered and emphasized the basic need for the development of essential capabilities in the disciplines involved and the laboratory and field facilities required for research in these disciplines. The task force lays special emphasis on some of the disciplines that are generally not adequately covered in aquaculture institutions such as engineering, economics, and feed technology, even though these may not have been specifically mentioned under the research requirements.
Besides the expertise necessary for developing appropriate designs of fish farms, hatcheries, raceways, cages, pens, etc., there is also a need for the development of suitable farm implements and harvesting devices. Cost-benefit analysis should form an integral part of each of the proposed experiments and should be considered as an important item of research concerning each farming system. Economic studies of farming operations must also be carried out to determine the minimum economic size of farms and enterprises. Similarly, surveys of locally available feed ingredients, determination of the nutritive values of the feed ingredients, and the formulation, preparation, and testing of least-cost feeds for various life stages of the cultivated animals, should form a basic activity in each of the institutions. Experimental and pilot-scale feed mills will be necessary for such work.
Although much of the feed technology work would initially be based on the nutritional requirements of the few warm-water fishes and crustaceans that have already been studied, it is necessary to start nutrition and food requirement studies of the species utilized in the selected farming systems as soon as possible. Similarly, expertise and facilities for diagnosis and treatment of diseases will have to be strengthened in the institutions in order that they participate effectively in integrated research programmes
Though in early research on aquaculture in the region, some attention was given to the hydrobiology of ponds, relatively little work has been done on the management of ecosystems in cultivated water bodies. An understanding of the structure and functioning of such ecosystems, including the production processes, can provide the scientific basis for proper management of a culture system. It is, therefore, necessary to develop or strengthen the capability and facilities for such work.
A. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, DHAULI (BHUBANESWAR) INDIA
1. INTRODUCTION
2. BACKGROUND
3. RESEARCH NEEDS
4. RESEARCH APPROACH
1. INTRODUCTION
The culture systems proposed for study in the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centre at the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre at Dhauli (Bhubaneswar) are:
(i) mono- and polyculture of Indian, Chinese, and common carps in ponds,
(ii) systems of carp culture in undrainable, freshwater ponds, and
(iii) culture of carps in reservoirs.
The Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI) from its inception in 1947, has given very high priority to research on problems relating to carp culture. At present, 65 of its research projects relate to this sector of inland fishery work. The Institute, through its Freshwater Fish Culture Division, has done some very outstanding work in the development of carp culture technologies, although greatly handicapped by the lack of adequate experimental and laboratory facilities. The All-India Coordinated Research Project on composite fish culture and fish seed production, operational research projects, and rural aquaculture projects implemented during the last eight years, has given the Institute opportunities to test technologies under field conditions in different states in India and also to carry out adaptive research.
The construction of the Freshwater Aquaculture Research Centre in Dhauli, which is expected to become operational in 1980, will make available to the Institute for the first time, the necessary facilities for well-planned laboratory and field research required for upgrading the technologies involved. The Dhauli centre will have 656 experimental ponds of different sizes, a modern hatchery, a feed mill, 32 laboratories, an aquarium, wet laboratories, cisterns, plastic pools, fibre-glass tanks, a raceway, workshop, and other ancillary facilities. There will be a total of 62 scientists and 94 supporting technical staff of different categories. A farmers' training centre (Krishi Vigyan Kendra) and Trainers' Training Centre are also attached to the Dhauli centre; this would give the research centre greater exposure to the problems of application of technologies in the field and extension work among the farmers. The concept of multidisciplinary systems-oriented research is already
accepted and implemented in the Institute. The staffing of the Dhauli centre, with possible strengthening and adjustments, could provide the services of disciplinal units/groups concerned with aquaculture engineering, fish breeding and seed production, genetics, limnology and pond management, nutrition and feed technology, fish pathology, statistics, and economics. It is necessary to develop the laboratory and field facilities for research in these disciplines, to enable effective interdisciplinary investigations.
The centre will receive UNDP/FAO assistance under the country project 'Intensification of Freshwater Fish Culture and Training (IND/75/031)' in the form of equipment, fellowships, and short-term consultants to (a) strengthen the central research, training, and demonstration facilities required to sustain the future development of freshwater aquaculture at the national level, (b) train the highly specialized staff required for the purpose, and (c) formulate and implement realistic research and demonstration programmes the existing gaps in fish culture technology as well as directed toward the aimed at filling transfer of the newly developed technologies to the producer. The regional project for the Establishment of an Aquaculture Network in Asia (RAS/76/003) will expand and strengthen the national research on carp culture to meet regional needs within an extended time-frame, providing, in addition, essential support for the national development activities in this sector. As
the facilities of the Dhauli centre for work on carp culture in reservoirs are limited, investigations on this system will have to be organized at a selected reservoir near Dhauli, for example, Hirakund in Orissa.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Cultivated Species and Species Combinations
2.2 Fish Farms and the Use of Multipurpose Ponds for Fish Culture
2.3 Breeding, Seed Production and Genetics
2.4 Predator and Weed Control
2.5 Fertilizing and Feeding
2.6 Health Protection
2.7 Harvesting and Economics
2.8 Culture of Carps in Reservoirs
The pond culture of Indian, Chinese and the common carps is probably the most ancient system of aquaculture in Asia, although its importance and contribution to fish production differ considerably among the various countries of the region. There are plans for the expansion of carp culture in almost all the countries through the transfer of existing technologies and their adaptation and improvement through research.
2.1 Cultivated Species and Species Combinations
The traditional form of carp culture in South Asia is based on the so-called Indian major carps, catla (Catla catla), rohu (Labeo rohita), mrigal (Cirrhina mrigala), and calbas (Labeo calbasu). The three varieties of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) were introduced into India almost a century ago for culture in certain areas, but the interest in the culture of exotic carps became substantial only some two decades ago with the introduction of the Chinese carps (grass carp, Ctenopharyngodon idella, and silver carp, Hypophthalmichthyus molitrix). As the Indian major carps, like the Chinese carps, do not breed in stagnant ponds and generally spawn only in their natural habitat, the farmers had to obtain the seed in the form of eggs, hatchlings, and fry from rivers. The seed of all the species occurred together in nature and could not be sorted out easily according to species. The farmers, therefore, collected and cultured them together in ponds. Thus a system of polyculture
evolved.
The zonation in their feeding habits; catla feeding largely on the surface and the mrigal and calbasu at the bottom (the latter feeding also on snails) gave a scientific basis for this combination of species. The CIFRI has conducted considerable research on the species ratios and stocking densities that give high yields under a series of culture conditions. In recent years this species combination has been enlarged to include the Chinese and common carps, generally omitting the calbas. In experimental and demonstrations ponds, CIFRI has obtained a rate of production of up to 10 000 kg/ha per annum with fertilization and supplemental feeding. However, the wide-scale adoption of this practice by farmers would obviously depend on the availability of fry or fingerlings of the various species at the appropriate time and in sufficient numbers. The complexity of culture is also obviously increased when a larger number of species with differing habits and requirements have to be
cultured together.
Although the benefits of polyculture are widely accepted and high production has been obtained, it has not yet been established that the combination of species now adopted is the most appropriate one, particularly in view of the overlap of feeding habits of some of the species. It has also not been experimentally proved that monoculture will not yield high and economically acceptable production, rendering the overall culture operations simpler. On the other hand, in areas where the ponds are infested by a large snail population, the addition of a snail feeding fish like the pangas (Pangasius spp.), which has been shown to be a good culturable species, may prove valuable. This could replace the slow-growing calbas, which is now generally omitted from the species combinations.
2.2 Fish Farms and the Use of Multipurpose Ponds for Fish Culture
An important feature of carp culture in the countries of South Asia is the use of ponds and other water bodies constructed for other uses, instead of well laid-out fish farms with dependable sources of water supply. Most of the ponds used for carp culture cannot be drained by gravity and pumps or mechanical devices have not generally been used for this purpose. This leads to the accumulation of large deposits of silt that create unfavourable conditions for fish culture. The value of properly planned fish farms for efficient fish culture is understood, but due to the large initial capital investment for construction, there is a general belief that such farms will not be economical. The majority of fish farms in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, etc., belong to government fishery departments and are generally used only for seed production or for experimental purposes. There is obviously a need to establish the economic viability of such farms, with special reference to the use of
sites such as swamps and waste lands that are likely to be available for farm construction, methods of controlling seepage and other water losses, economical means of draining and filling, etc.
As stated earlier, the general practice in at least South Asia has been to culture fish in existing water bodies, such as village and homestead ponds. These are usually constructed for purposes other than fish culture. They are simultaneously used for washing, bathing, watering cattle, and irrigating vegetable crops. The main source of water supply is seasonal rain and, therefore, the depth of water depends on the amount of rainfall, intensity of evaporation, and seepage. Significant fluctuations in water level are a common feature. Many ponds are seasonal and others have only a very low water level during summer months. As the ponds are stocked during or immediately after the rainy season when they have the maximum water level, the biomass of fish in the ponds will be highest during the dry months when the fish have grown in size and the volume of water is lowest. Obviously this creates major hazards to the fish stock. There is often no ready source of water in the
neighbourhood to feed the ponds and, even if available, cannot be used for lack of pumping facilities. The present high price of fuel often leads to the view that pumping will not be economical. The use of unconventional sources of energy, such as solar and wind power, has not yet been tried for operating pumps in this region.
The ponds that cannot be drained by gravity can be referred to as undrainable, in the circumstances described. These ponds have heavy deposits of sediments at the bottom and many of them have permanent or seasonal blooms of blue-green algae, mainly Microcystis. A number of studies have been carried out in CIFRI and elsewhere on these plankton blooms, but there is probably not yet a full understanding and reliable quantification of the basic production processes in the water column and sediment-water interface and the role of the reduced, slowly decomposing sediment, to form the basis for suitable management measures.
The development of a dependable source of water supply may serve to minimize or obviate a number of problems faced in the use of undrainable ponds and other water bodies for carp culture. The use of shallow or deep tubewells, where groundwater supplies are adequate, has been considered, and some progressive farmers are now planning to try this. Such wells, besides providing a source of water for the ponds, may also serve the domestic needs of villages and thus contribute to human as well as pond sanitation. Aerators have been used elsewhere to improve water quality and growth rate of fish in ponds. Thus far, these have not been tried in the south or southeast Asian countries.
2.3 Breeding, Seed Production and Genetics
The major highlights of research at CIFRI relate to the induced breeding of Indian and Chinese carps and to the development of improved nursery practices. The technique of induced breeding by the injection of pituitary extract was developed in India as early as 1957 and both Indian and Chinese carps were bred at the Institute. However, India still depends to a very large extent on the collection of spawn from rivers to meet its carp seed requirements. From the point of view of technology, the two major factors responsible for this difference would appear to be the lack of suitable brood fish-rearing techniques and poor hatchery methods. The general practice is to obtain mature or maturing fish from farms or natural bodies of water during, or just before, the spawning season. The Chinese experience would indicate the need to relate the inducing technique to the age, size, and species of carp, as well as whether the individual fish has been bred before and, if so, the number
of times it has been bred. There is reason to believe that the response to hormone administration would be higher in older fish that have bred more than once. The need for pituitary extract can possibly be reduced or avoided in such cases and commercially available mammalian or human chorionic gonadotropin used instead. Proper handling methods and the treatment of spawned fish and their feeding and maintenance for future breeding have yet to be developed for both Indian major carps and Chinese carps under Indian culture conditions.
CIFRI has carried out some work on the potency of pituitary material and the dosages to be used for breeding, including the ampouling of extracts for ready use. However, considerable work remains to be done to standardize the dozes as the percentage of success in breeding is still variable; at times not more than 50 percent. Besides the low potency of donor pituitary and poor condition of the brood fish, failure may often be due to unfavourable weather conditions. Breeding success is still dependent on hydrological conditions created by monsoon rains. The determinant factors have not yet been clearly decided to make breeding independent of uncertain monsoon conditions.
Work in CIFRI has demonstrated the feasibility of spawning the same fish two or more times during the season. Proper development of the relevant techniques for multiple spawning and shifting of breeding time can prove of great benefit to seed production.
The traditional technique of hatching and rearing larvae in cloth hapas in open bodies of water is widely followed. Although with some improvements the hatching and survival rates have been increased, comparative studies indicate the superiority of modern hatcheries. Even though the initial cost of a hatchery is higher, in the long run it may be more economical in view of the increased efficiency and longer life of hatchery equipment.
The potential benefits of genetic manipulation in carp culture are well recognized in CIFRI and other research institutions of the region, but very little work has so far been done, due to either the lack of expertise or adequate facilities. Once the method of controlled breeding was developed, CIFRI attempted some preliminary experiments in inter-specific and inter-generic hybridization, mainly for the purpose of improving the market quality of the fish (smaller head and deeper body as in crosses between catla and rohu) or obtaining faster growth rates. Even though the results achieved are encouraging, it has not yet been possible to carry out adequate progeny testing due to a lack of facilities. Genetic selection experiments to prevent inbreeding depression or to obtain strains with greater resistance to temperature variations common in tropical ponds, resistance to diseases, enhanced growth rates, etc., have not been attempted.
The availability of pituitary material in sufficient quantities remains a major constraint as there is, at present, no dependable source of supply. The common carp has proved to be a very satisfactory donor and, therefore, it has been suggested that the culture of an adequate number of common carp in each farm, primarily to meet the pituitary requirements, may be an effective way of meeting the need.
As stated earlier, CIFRI's work on nursery practices has resulted in relatively dependable technologies. Survival of fry has been raised to as much as 80 percent and stocking rates up to 10 million/ha. The techniques consist of the eradication of predator and weed fishes with indigenous piscicides, followed by liming and fertilization with organic or inorganic fertilizers, control of aquatic insects which prey upon carp seed, and supplemental feeding. The addition of cobalt chloride (at 0.01 mg/fish/day) is reported to result in high survival rates. The maintenance of a standing crop of the required food organisms is a key factor and appropriate fertilizing schedules for this have to be fully worked out. Some preliminary studies have been undertaken oh the culture of selected fish food organisms such as Chlorella, Daphnia, Moina and Brachionus. However, these studies are still in very early stages of determining the feasibility of producing food organisms in separate
cultures for introduction into nursery ponds for mass culture of fry and fingerlings.
2.4 Predator and Weed Control
Two of the major problems faced in production pond management, besides water supply in undrainable fish ponds, are the control of predators and weeds. Even with repeated fishing, using suitable nets, it is not possible to remove all the predators, particularly because of the deposits of silt and organic matter at the pond bottom. Due to the unavailability of commercial derris powder, CIFRI has made a search of indigenous fish poisons of vegetable origin. Mahua (Basia latifolia) oil cake is now used and recommended by the Institute as it is a selective piscicide, only marginally toxic to fish food organisms. It also serves as a manure, and toxicity is lost in ponds in a short period of time. The roots, bark, and seeds of Barringtonia acutangula have been found to be an effective piscicide. The growing of an adequate number of these trees by the side or on dikes of fish farms may be a convenient means of making a suitable piscicide available for pond treatment.
Aquatic weeds constitute a serious constraint to the reclamation of water bodies for fish culture, as well as to the management of fish ponds. As a result of many years of research at CIFRI, effective methods of controlling or utilizing macro-vegetation have been developed. However, the economic feasibility of the methods, when incorporated in an intensive pond management system, leading to increased production and higher profits, has not been determined. The absolute cost of weed control would not be a useful criterion for deciding the economics of its use in fish culture. Although some research has been carried out on the control of algal blooms in fish ponds, a dependable method has yet to be developed, especially for ponds fertilized with inorganic fertilizer and for undrainable ponds with permanent algal blooms.
2.5 Fertilizing and Feeding
Fertilization with organic manures and inorganic fertilizers is also recommended for fish food production in rearing and stocking ponds. The most commonly used organic manure is cow dung. Studies have been made on the use of inorganic fertilizers such as urea, ammonium sulphate, calcium, and ammonium nitrate, and triple and single super phosphates under different soil and water conditions. The combination of N and P is reported to give high fish production, but a combination of mustard oil cake and inorganic fertilizers (N-P-K) appears to give better results (at least in nursery ponds). Despite these valuable findings, the basic data for the development of definitive fertilizing schedules on a national or regional basis is lacking. In view of the competing demands for the presently-used organic manures and the problems of handling, transporting, and storing large quantities of such manures, greater attention will have to be given to the use of inorganic fertilizers for
large-scale fish farming. This will necessitate the simultaneous development of suitable methods for controlling algal blooms, as chemical fertilizers have been observed to promote such blooms.
In carp farming in this region, complete feeding does not appear to have been tried. Supplemental feeding is done in most nursery ponds and in some rearing and stocking ponds. The commonly used feeds are rice bran and oil cakes. These are not inexpensive and also have other uses. Although preliminary experiments with leaf proteins and other unconventional feeds have been undertaken, a critical survey of the availability of potential feed ingredients, their nutrient values and costs, has not yet been made. Some indicative information has been gathered on the requirements of essential nutrients and this could form the basis for the preparation of test feeds, pending more detailed information on the nutritional needs of different life stages of the various species of carps.
2.6 Health Protection
Although occasionally fish-kills occur in carp ponds, the incidence of diseases is believed to be generally low. Most such mortalities are due to sudden changes in water quality. However, many ecto- and endoparasites have been described from carps and occasionally unexplained mortalities have also been reported. With the adoption of more intensive farming techniques including higher stocking rates, there is every likelihood of increased health hazards. Diagnostic and control measures must be developed, in advance, to meet such eventualities. Research in CIFRI 80 far has been restricted to systematics of parasites and application of some known disease control techniques. Laboratory facilities for diagnostic work and disease control research and adequately trained personnel for such work need to be developed for the assessment of disease incidence, development of systematic health protection measures for rearing brood fish, hatchery operation, rearing of fry and fingerlings,
and production of marketable fish. Suitable measures will have to be adopted to prevent the spread of diseases from infected hatcheries and ponds.
2.7 Harvesting and Economics
Although the seine nets used for harvesting in ponds are reasonably efficient, complete harvesting is seldom achieved in non-drainable ponds. The problem is more serious with certain species, such as the common carp. Very little research or improvisation has been directed so far to this problem.
One of the reasons for slow progress of fish culture in India and other countries of the region is said to be losses sustained because of poaching. Small ponds or farms may not justify round-the-clock watch and ward, but even in larger farms this has not proved to be so efficient, due to social and practical problems. Of all the devices so far used to prevent poaching by CIFRI, placement of barbed wire on identified spots in ponds, appears to have been the most efficient deterrent.
The few studies on the economics of carp culture so far carried out indicate its high profitability. However, these studies related mostly to culture in existing water bodies, which meant very little capital investment. The need to determine the comparative economics of fish culture in properly designed fish farms and in undrainable village or homestead ponds, has already been pointed out. It has to be determined whether the higher investment can be justified in terms of sustainable returns on a long-term basis. At present, fish farmers grow carps to a size of about 1 kg before harvesting, as that size fetches a good price in the market. Fish of even smaller size, weighing about 500 g, can be sold and it appears necessary to determine the minimum economic size to which carps should be grown in ponds. Similarly, there is at present a lack of necessary basic information to recommend the minimum economic size of farms for carp culture.
Economics form a major consideration in every aspect of commercial aquaculture but this element has not often been identified and measured in experiments. The need for appropriate evaluation of techniques is now increasingly recognized and it can be hoped that future research will yield some of the essential data required for economic modelling of fish culture operations.
2.8 Culture of Carps in Reservoirs
There are extensive lakes and reservoirs in Asia that can be used for fish production by the application of culture techniques. The Chinese manage their lakes and reservoirs, more or less as large fish farms. In other countries, a system of stocking is adopted to increase fish populations. In India, there are about 500 large and medium reservoirs covering a total water area of about 3 million hectares. The All-India Coordinated Research Project at CIFRI undertook a detailed investigation in seven reservoirs, and based on the ecological information obtained, management practices were developed. These practices have served to increase fish yields from 25 kg/ha to 80 kg/ha within a span of five years. This ecosystem-oriented reservoir development includes a stocking policy based on trophic strata in terms of shared, unshared, and vacant ecological niches.
The Dhauli centre does not have any reservoirs in its immediate vicinity to undertake detailed investigations for a critical evaluation of stocking techniques. However, it should be possible for the centre to undertake some experimental work on cage or pen culture of carps in a selected reservoir, such as the one at Hirakud in Orissa State. Cage culture of Chinese carps has already been tried with encouraging results in lakes in Nepal. Pen culture, along the lines of milk fish culture in Laguna de Bay in the Philippines, may also be worth trying. In view of the low survival and catchability of stocked fish in reservoirs, the overall production obtainable from a reservoir can probably be matched by intensive cage or pen culture in a limited area. Technical and economic feasibility must be studied on an experimental basis and the economic benefits and environmental effects critically examined.
3. RESEARCH NEEDS
3.1 General Problems of Carp Culture
3.2 Special Problems of Undrainable Water Bodies
3.3 Cage and Pen Culture of Carps in Reservoir
Based on the problems faced in the expansion and intensification of carp culture indicated, the following research needs have been identified (it should be pointed out that some of these studies have already been carried out on a limited scale in CIFRI, but have to be repeated and expanded using the upgraded facilities at the Centre to verify the results achieved):
3.1 General Problems of Carp Culture
(i) Selection and establishment of brood stocks
Determination of criteria for establishing brood stocks (origin, morphological, and health criteria); establishing techniques for rearing and maintenance of brood fish; defining the optimum environmental conditions, feeding, and stocking density for best reproductive capacity; study of breeding potentials (fecundity, egg size, hatching rate, larval size and survival) according to species, age and size of brood fish; extending the breeding season and inducing multiple spawning; farming of common carp as donors of pituitary glands.
(ii) Development of hatchery techniques
Standardization of optimal environmental conditions for hypophysation and the release of eggs and milt, determining the best time for hormone treatment; optimization and standardization of hypophysation and the use of alternative hormone sources; adoption and improvement of hatchery equipment and methods.
(iii) Nursing of fry and fingerlings
The culture of natural food organisms for fry; the development of feeds for fry and fingerlings; control of weeds and predators in nursery ponds; the use of chemicals for selective enhancement of zooplankton (Rotatoria) in ponds; determining the rates of fertilization, feeding and stocking for monoculture of fry and fingerlings of various species of carps preventive measures for health protection.
(iv) Fertilization and manuring of ponds
Comparative studies of the effects of fertilization with inorganic fertilizers and organic manures (and their combination) on natural food production, water, soil and sediment chemistry; interaction between fertilization and feeding at various levels of standing crop of fish.
(v) Production methods (mono- and polyculture)
Re-examination of fish combinations based on feeding and other behavioural characteristics at different levels of treatments (fertilization, manuring and feeding) and at different stocking rates; inclusion of mollusc-feeding species in fish combinations, comparative experiments in mono- and polyculture under identical environmental and management conditions, with the examination of economic and logistic problems; determining effect of aeration on yields.
(vi) Nutrition and feed technology
Survey of local feed stuffs and testing their suitability as fish feed (acceptability, digestibility, and effect on fish growth), defining the nutritional requirements of the various carps; formulation and preparation of supplementary and complete diets using locally available ingredients and their testing; production of medicated feeds; establishing the optimum feeding rates for the various species at different temperatures, standing crops, and fish sizes; feed processing at the farm level, and at small-scale or large factory level; feeding techniques (feed dispensers, feeding frequencies, etc.).
(vii) Fish health protection
Development of laboratory diagnostic methods for viral, bacterial, parasitic and other diseases and of fish health monitoring system; study of disease entities in carps (aetiology, epizootiology, prophylaxis and control); incorporation of prophylactic measures.
(viii) Genetic studies
The selection of fish strains with better growth potentials, meat quality, resistance to diseases and environmental hazards, and longer breeding periods; cross-breeding for the prevention of in-breeding depression, for heterosis, and for introgression of the above-mentioned beneficial characteristics into one strain.
(ix) Control of algal blooms
Determination of factors causing algal blooms, particularly blue-greens; their control (including the promotion of the growth of desired species) through chemical means and management (stocking densities of various fish species, water level, desilting, etc.).
(x) Aquaculture engineering
Design of fish farms for easier and better management, use of unconventional sources of energy, such as wind and solar power for pumping water and aeration of ponds; development of different types of aerators; development of effective anti-poaching devices.
(xi) Economics
Determine the economic feasibility of well laid-out fish farms with dependable water supply; cost-benefit analyses of the use of different sources of water, pumping, use of unconventional energy, seepage control, mechanical and manual methods of farm construction; comparative study of small and large hatcheries; defining the minimum economic size of farmed fish for marketing; determination of-minimum economic size of farms.
3.2 Special Problems of Undrainable Water Bodies
(i) Limnological studies
Defining the effects of water level on the physico-chemical characteristics of water, soil and sediment; determining the effect of pond conditions on fish physiology and growth rate; studying the effect of aeration and silt removal on pond chemistry and fish growth.
(ii) Production methods
Determination of the effect of low water levels and the addition of water on fish yields; study of the effectiveness of harvesting methods; assessment of fish survival; study of the effects of changes in fish density on yield; use of piscicides for complete harvesting.
(iii) Engineering and economics
Draining and refilling by wind or solar driven pumps; shallow and deep tubewells as sources of water supply; methods of removing silt without draining; development of more efficient harvesting methods and gear. Analyzing the cost of increasing water supply by pumping or by other means against benefits of increased fish production.
3.3 Cage and Pen Culture of Carps in Reservoirs
Selection of sites for cage and pen culture; selection of species and species combinations for culture with or without artificial feeding; design of suitable cages and pens; management measures including feeding regimes, nature of feeds and feed dispensing; health protection; protection of fish stocks from poaching; rearing of fingerlings and of marketable fish; harvesting methods; economic evaluation and comparison of cost-effectiveness with stocking operations, taking into account costs of fingerlings and survival rates, catchability, need for clearing of reservoir bottom, etc.
4. RESEARCH APPROACH
4.1 Disciplinal Studies
4.2 Interdisciplinary Studies
Research at the Lead Centre should primarily be based on disciplinal units. These units should be formed according to the specific research problems of aquaculture and not necessarily the conventional academic disciplines. In addition to studying specific problems within their own fields, disciplinal units will contribute specialists to form interdisciplinary teams as required for investigating broader and more complex problems relating to the selected carp farming systems. The studies to be carried out by disciplinal units in support of systems-oriented research, are the following:
4.1 Disciplinal Studies
(i) Fish breeding and seed production
Influence of age and size of brood fish on fecundity, egg size, and hatching rate in the six species of carp; optimization and standardization of hypophysation and use of other ovulating substances; determination of optimal environmental conditions for ovulation of the six species of carp; extension of breeding period and multiple spawning; defining optimal methods of egg treatment and incubation, as well as the indoor holding of yolked larvae.
(ii) Limnology and pond management
Quantification of energy flow; oxygen, phosphorus, and nitrogen metabolisms and cycling in ponds to optimize fertilization, stocking, feeding and water quality control. Algal bloom and pest controls.
(iii) Nutrition and feed technology
Digestibility of feeds and food metabolism; nutritional requirements (complete diets, protein-energy ratios, etc.) of various age groups of the six carp species; survey and evaluation of local feed stuffs; diet formulations and testing; feed processing technology.
(iv) Fish pathology
Development of cell lines for virological studies; characterisation of viral and bacterial fish pathogens, defining histopathological processes in various diseases; definition of conditions that cause outbreaks of diseases; testing of chemicals for prevention and treatment of diseases.
(v) Genetics
Fish marking methods; establishing of genetic lines; progeny testing of various lines and crossbreeds at various stages of life cycle (for survival and resistance to diseases, growth rate, food utilization, etc.); interspecies and intergenetic hybridization for the desired characters.
(vi) Aquaculture engineering
Pond construction (design, depth, inlets, screening, outlets); types of water supply (gravitation, pumping from tubewells or other sources), prevention or reduction of seepage and evaporation; design of cages and pens, feed dispensers, aerators, traps and other devices for predator control; prevention of poaching, sediment removal from ponds; harvesting techniques, transport techniques, use of unconventional energy sources in aquaculture
(vii) Economics
Cost-benefit analysis of various types of fish farms, hatchery layouts as well as of different procedures and techniques based on both experimental work at the Centre and pilot-scale or large-scale production elsewhere.
The more complex studies to be carried out by interdisciplinary teams will be performed mainly in experimental ponds. Some experiments will also be done in village or homestead ponds, the purpose of such research is to elucidate the interactions between different variables (controllable and uncontrollable) and their effect on fish production. To enable evaluations of as many variables as possible, a factorial design experiment may be preferable.
4.2 Interdisciplinary Studies
The following are the interdisciplinary studies suggested:
(i) Techniques of rearing and maintenance of brood fish in ponds;
units involved: (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)
Selection of brood stock. Determination of optimal stocking density, supplemental feeding and pond management for optimal growth, sexual maturation, quality and quantity of sexual products; prophylactic measures for prevention of disease transmission, reduction of brood fish losses, egg, and larval mortality.
(ii) Farming of common carp as donor of pituitary material;
units involved: (i), (ii), (iii) and (vii)
Production of donor fish of uniform size and sexual maturity; comparing the efficiency and economy of mono- and polyculture for producing donor fish.
(iii) Nursing of fry and fingerlings in monoculture;
units involved: (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)
Development of hatcheries and comparative study of the efficiency of hatchery equipment and design. Comparison of methods of preparing drainable and non-drainable ponds for fry and fingerling production, efficiency of feeding with natural food in ponds, natural food produced outside nursing pond, feeding with complete diets under indoor conditions, feeding with complete and supplemental diets in ponds, health monitoring, prophylactic measures, and treatments for health protection.
(iv) Economic methods of increasing yield of carps in ponds;
units involved: (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vii)
Studies on relationships between fertilization, manuring, feeding, carp species combinations, and density; the effect of these interacting variables on the environmental factors, such as dissolved oxygen fluctuations, alkalinity, CO[2], etc., as well as on the soil, the accumulation of organic matter, redox potential, and on the natural food sources such as benthos, phytoplankton and zooplankton. Light penetration and primary production analyses.
(v) Effect of water level on fish production;
units involved: (ii), (iii), (vi), and (vii)
(vi) Increase of fish production in non-drainable ponds;
units involved: (ii), (vi) and (vii)
Effect of water level, desilting, control of water blooms, and water supplementation on environmental conditions and yield.
(vii) Cage and pen culture in reservoirs;
units involved: (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii)
B. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, BANGKOK, THAILAND
1. INTRODUCTION
2. CLARIAS AND OPHICEPHALUS POND CULTURE
3. MACROBRACHIUM CULTURE
4. CAGE CULTURE OF PANGASIUS
5. TRICHOGASTER CULTURE IN RICE FIELDS
6. POND CULTURE OF PUNTIUS
7. MUSSEL CULTURE
8. OYSTER CULTURE
1. INTRODUCTION
The culture systems selected for studies at the Regional Lead Centre in NIFI are the following (listed in order of priority):
(a) Clarias and Ophicephalus pond culture
(b) Macrobrachium pond culture
(c) Cage culture of Pangasius
(d) Rice field culture of Trichogaster
(e) Puntius pond culture
(f) Culture of mussels and oysters on foreshore areas
NIFI personnel are directly concerned with research, extension and technical services relating to the first five farming systems. Culture of mussels and oysters comes under the area of responsibility of the Brackishwater Division of the Directorate of Fisheries. The limited staff assigned for the development of this system is presently engaged in extension work and any expanded research may become possible only after new facilities planned to be constructed with bilateral assistance from Japan are established. These facts account for lower priority given to research on the culture of mussels and oysters, although it is recognized that there is appreciable scope for the improvement and expansion of this system in Thailand as well as the rest of the region. The task force has, however, proposed some preliminary research to be carried out, if the necessary facilities become available.
In formulating the research programme the task force took into account NIFI's current activities, including its heavy commitments to extension work, available scientific and technical manpower and its experimental facilities. The objectives and work programmes of the two UNDP/FAO country projects relating to catfish and Macrobrachium culture and the need for applied research in support of the extension work they are expected to undertake, were discussed in some detail with the assistance of FAO experts concerned. The number of outdoor ponds and tanks at the institute is limited and there appears to be no immediate possibility for expanding these facilities or building new ones in the vicinity. There are enough ponds at the fishery stations directly under the Directorate of Fisheries in the country, but a policy decision has to be made for their utilization, as at present they are all used almost totally for fry and juvenile production. Macrobrachium work of the Directorate
of Fisheries is concentrated at the Chacheongsao Fisheries Station and it would be advantageous to organize research on the culture of this species in collaboration with the station staff utilizing some of the field facilities available there. Another possibility is the use of pond facilities of the Kasertsart University and it was indicated to the task force that if the University becomes a cooperating institution in the Lead Centre's research programme, these facilities could be used for experimental purposes. Cooperation with other university centres in Thailand could also be considered for some of the specialized research that may be needed. The third possibility is the use of private ponds, in conjunction with demonstration. This has to be considered if the other two alternatives prove to be unfeasible.
The shortage of scientific manpower at the Institute, especially due to their concurrent responsibilities for extension and technical services, can be met by the recruitment of additional staff or the utilization of Kasertsart University Fishery Faculty staff, who at present have very little opportunity for directed aquaculture research. The services of a limited number of expatriate workers could also be obtained through FAO's associate expert scheme. They could work under the guidance of experts and consultants to be provided under the project.
The task force discussed the feasibility of separating the research and extension or technical support activities at the Institute, but understood that this will be difficult. Since the multidisciplinary research proposed has to be carried out by teams of workers specializing in different aspects of aquaculture it is expected that all the present scientific staff of the institute can participate in the research as members of one or more teams, as appropriate.
From the information provided, it would appear that the Institute has either already obtained or will soon be obtaining most of the equipment required for the proposed research activities. However, there will be need for assistance from the project to remodel or repair some of the equipment already obtained to enable their proper use.
The library of the Institute needs considerable strengthening, both as support to the research programme, and to enable the participation of the institute in the proposed information activities of the project. It is essential to have a suitably qualified staff member with the necessary language facility assigned for this work.
2. CLARIAS AND OPHICEPHALUS POND CULTURE
2.1 Background
2.2 Research Needs
2.3 Research Approach
2.1 Background
Culture of Clarias is well established and profitable in Thailand, with a total annual production of $0 000 tons from ponds. C. batrachus and C. macrocephalus are both commercially important. However, C. batrachus has wider regional farming prospects, for example, in India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, whereas C. macrocephalus has potential primarily in Thailand and the Philippines. They are cultured in stagnant or running water ponds, either in monoculture as in Thailand or experimentally in mixed cultures with other species, in India. Experiments are underway in India on production of C. batrachus in cages. Natural feeds are worms, insects, and decaying animal matter.
Since these fish have air breathing capabilities they are generally reared at extremely high densities in Thailand. Stocking rates of 3 to 7 cm fingerlings range from 100 to 300 fish per m^2. Feeding with mixtures of trash fish, rice bran, and broken rice results in growth to marketable size (100-350 g) in 4-5 months, with yields averaging 3 kg/m but reaching 10 kg/m^2 in some eases.
Pond management practices include only water exchange when necessary and liming of ponds in some instances to create more hygienic conditions. High stocking densities and high feed inputs result in deterioration of the pond environment. Survival from stocking to harvest is usually only 30 to 40 percent and diseases are very common, resulting in losses and reduction in market value of surviving fish.
The primary diseases observed include a disease entity attributed to Aeromonas spp., a syndrome with haemorrhages on the head, Gyrodactilosis and Trichodinossis. These diseases account for a significant proportion of mortality in fingerlings. The diseases are often complex and very likely involve interactions of a number of environmental and nutritional factors. Overcrowding of production ponds, coupled with poor water quality, create conditions stressing the fish and aggravating nutritional and infectious disease problems. With the type of pH fluctuations observed, 20-30 ppm ammonia may be found in the system.
The traditional method of feeding rice bran (10 percent) and trash fish (90 percent) has recently been modified to include a carbohydrate source (broken rice) at a level of up to 10 percent. To this mix is added a feed supplement which contains vitamins and sometimes antibiotics. The coarse ingredients are crudely mixed and extruded through an engine-powered spaghetti type extruder. The quality of the feed depends primarily upon the quality of the trash fish Generally, the moist pellets produced have good water stability because of natural gums present in the trash fish. Pellets are fed twice daily. Advantages of this feeding system are; (a) low cost, (b) simple technology, (c) readily available ingredients with the possible exception of trash fish, and (d) good water stability of feed. Disadvantages are: (a) uncertain quality and composition of trash fish depending on its stage of deterioration, (b) high biological oxygen demand of the feed, and (c) short shelf-life of
moist pellets. The feeding of Clarias for commercial production in Thailand is based largely on empirical knowledge. The uncertain quality of raw materials together with rather poor diet preparation procedures, make evaluation of these traditional diets difficult and their effectiveness unpredictable.
Under an FAO/UNDP project, NIFI has already planned extension and demonstration of pond engineering and management practices that should lead to improvement in disease prevention and treatment, as well as to improvement of management practices generally. Additional research is underway on pellet stability, haematology, and parasitology of Clarias. A research project has been completed on the prevention of Aeromonas infections in Clarias.
Ophicephalus is reared using methods similar to those for Clarias, except that only wild fry are captured and sold to farmers. Commercial-scale pond culture of Ophicephalus striatus is practiced in Thailand, where production is 4 500 tons/year, and to a limited extent in Indonesia. While monoculture is common in Thailand, culture with other species is practiced in other countries such as India, where polyculture with Anabas is carried out in certain areas. Natural foods include fishes, prawns, insects, tadpoles, and gastropods.
In Thailand, the common practices are to stock ponds at rates of up to 75/m^2; feed with trash fish, rice bran, and broken rice, mixed with a vitamin mix and sometimes antibiotics. Change water when necessary and harvest after about six months when the fish have attained weights of 0.5-1.0 kg. Yields of 9 kg/m^2 can be expected. Extremely high mortality rates occur between the time of stocking production ponds and the time of harvest; however, this mortality is accepted by farmers since fry costs are very low (Baht 0.05 each). Poor environmental conditions contribute to losses from disease occurring throughout the growing period.
Problems of commercial culture are almost identical to those for Clarias.
2.2 Research Needs
Because of the similarity of culture methods, all the research needs identified for Clarias also apply to Ophicephalus. The more important needs are enumerated below:
(i) Determine acceptable water quality criteria (allowing normal growth rate, food utilization and health), including O[2], CO[2], pH, NO[3], and BOD for fry, fingerlings, and larger fish to provide guidelines for pond management.
(ii) Develop a simple field monitoring system and/or device for detecting deterioration of water quality in ponds (for instance, a sensitive indicator fish species, or simple chemical kit).
(iii) Determine optimal stocking density per unit of surface and of water volume for fry, fingerlings, and market fish ponds.
(iv) Investigate the influence of fry and fingerling grading on cannibalism, diseases, and survival rates.
(v) Develop methods for retaining the nutritive value of trash fish by ensiling with organic or mineral acid, and work out feeding systems using such products.
(vi) Study the two emerging specific diseases of Clarias ('Rok boo boam' and 'Kalok raust) and those as yet unidentified in both species of fish, to determine aetiology, epizootiology, and control measures.
(vii) Test selected antiparasitic and antibacterial drugs for efficient and economical bath treatment for fry and fingerlings before releasing into ponds.
(viii) Improve controlled breeding and seed production, including comparison with natural collection regarding impact on natural fish stocks and economy of fish culture.
2.3 Research Approach
An integrated research project on Clarias pond culture system is proposed to explore the feasibility of reducing mortality and improving its efficiency. System oriented research will be conducted using pilot-scale production experiments to evaluate selected management procedures. Experiments will be designed, based on the following interacting variables considered to be significant with regard to the improvement of the system:
(i) seed quality in respect to size composition;
(ii) stocking density;
(iii) diet, using preserved trash fish or substitutes, more complete rations, and alternative protein sources;
(iv) environmental control, using monitoring and management methods to maintain water quality, and
(v) health protection measures (including improvement of prophylactic measures and in-depth studies of infectious diseases).
Work on controlled breeding can be done by cooperating institutions carrying out the proposed research, or NIFI undertaking such work at a later stage.
The work on Ophicephalus will be carried out in the second phase, after the results on Clarias provide guidelines for detailed research planning.
3. MACROBRACHIUM CULTURE
3.1 Background
3.2 Research Needs
3.3 Research Approach
3.1 Background
Macrobrachium culture is a rapidly growing industry in Thailand. Annual production exceeds 250 tons from more than 200 farms with farm sizes ranging from 800 m^2 to 40 ha. Average yield is about 1 000 kg/ha. Local demand exceeds supply and considerable quantities are imported from Burma. Current farm gate value of Baht 140/kg has served to stimulate the industry.
Many hatcheries have been established, mainly in the area east of Bangkok, following the example of the Chacheongsao Fisheries Station. These include many small 'back-yard' hatcheries and two modern commercial hatcheries in the Pattaya and Rayong areas. Some hatcheries have their own brood stock ponds; some bring in spawners from production ponds when required. Larvae are nursed in concrete or fibreglass tanks and most hatcheries operate on daily exchange of water rather than recirculation.
The techniques for the production of post-larvae from hatcheries are in a constant state of development and, in the better hatcheries, larval survival to metamorphosis reaches 50 percent. The standard diet consists of an egg custard containing minced fish or mussel meat. This is fed several times per day, together with an evening feeding with Artemia nauplii which counteracts cannibalism at night. Current total postlarvae supply is approximately 30 million per year, of which 6 million originate from the Government hatchery at Chacheongsao.
Post larvae are distributed to farms from the Government hatchery gratis or at a low cost (Baht 0.25 each) and sold by commercial hatcheries at prices varying between Baht 0.50 and Baht 1.00 each, depending on their size (age after metamorphosis). Grow-out prawns are fed a variety of diets ranging from farm produced moist-type pellets to commercial hard pellets meant for poultry. Feed conversion of the wet diets averages 6.0 to 7.0. Stocking density varies between 5/m^2 and 20/m^2. Harvesting usually begins at five months when a thinning-out process is begun and the larger prawns are sold, optimum market size being 75 g per animal. Harvesting is completed after about eight months.
Total yield per ha is often less than 1 000 kg per year. Survival can be as low as 20-40 percent, particularly when high stocking rates are employed. This low recovery is attributed by many farmers to predators such as crabs, carnivorous fish, turtles, etc. Cannibalism is minimized by placing logs in the ponds to serve as sanctuaries for moulting prawns. Pond water is not normally continuously renewed but some of the larger farms replace up to 20 percent per day by means of mechanical pumps operated for a few hours every day.
It is believed that low survival and low production rates in farms are the most serious problems. These problems need resolution, through improved management techniques, pond construction, and better knowledge about the optimum means of supplying the nutrient requirements of post-larval prawns. Disease does not yet seem to be a major factor in low survival rates. As mentioned before, constant improvements are being made in hatchery technology and it is not felt that research on this topic is a priority item for the Lead Centre. The economic need to find a replacement for Artemia nauplii as a larval diet has been reduced by the success of an innoculation programme designed to produce Thai-grown cysts; in any case, this topic is being studied by many laboratories elsewhere in the world and duplication is not warranted. The research needs listed below, therefore, concentrate on grow-out production technology.
3.2 Research Needs
There are seven groups of research needs and they are listed below:
(i) Pond management studies including methods for the exclusion and control of predators; investigations on the effect on water quality of the application of various types of diets; and studies on the effects of stocking density, eye ablation (leading to hormonal manipulation), mono-sex rearing, and moult synchronization on feeding and behavioural patterns, and on subsequent growth and survival rates. This will in some cases require laboratory, rather than field experimentation.
(ii) Development of balanced diets for Macrobrachium with desirable commercial attributes for all stages of growth.
(iii) Studies on the means of decreasing the wastage of feed applied to ponds due to poor diet stability and the feeding habits of the prawns.
(iv) Investigations on fertilizer application in relation to feeding to establish the optimum balance between natural and artificial feed.
(v) Studies on methods of improving feed dispersal within the pond and on feeding frequency.
(vi) Identification of the major bacteria and parasites affecting the health of the species and the development of prophylactic and treatment measures. This work would include studies on larval as well as post-larval prawns.
(vii) Isolation and identification of potentially harmful macro-organisms affecting the marketability of the final product, and the development of techniques to improve quality and sanitary control in post-harvest operations.
3.3 Research Approach
A wide recommended oriented to incorporate field of research is indicated in section 3.2, but the following topics are for immediate investigation by the Lead Centre. This research will be system-increase production and reduce losses, and experiments should be designed to the relevant variables.
(i) Develop improved methods for preventing ingress of predators and pests and for their eradication in ponds.
(ii) Study the effect of different pond preparation techniques on productivity.
(iii) Study the utilization of natural food by Macrobrachium, and develop ways of increasing its availability by fertilization where the management system lends itself to this technique.
(iv) Develop diets specifically designed to provide supplementary feed for Macrobrachium in ponds.
(v) Develop a pelleted ration which provides all its nutrient requirements.
(vi) Study the importance of calcium levels in water to production rates in ponds.
(vii) Carry out laboratory and field investigations into the possibility of controlling behaviour, growth, cannibalism, and gender through hormonal manipulation.
4. CAGE CULTURE OF PANGASIUS
4.1 Background
4.2 Research Needs
4.3 Research Approach
4.1 Background
The cage culture of Pangasius spp. is a traditional practice in Southeast Asia. In recent years there has been considerable interest in the expansion of the industry and in the introduction of the practice in other countries of Asia. The two most important cultured species are Pangasius sutchi and P. pangasius, although there are also other species that contribute both to capture and culture fisheries in Asia. They are omnivorous in feeding habits and have been found to feed selectively oh molluscs in ponds.
Commercial-scale cage culture of P. sutchi is widely practiced in Thailand and the present production is estimated to be around 1 500 tons per year. The number of cages is reported to be increasing, indicating the profitability of the operations. Marketing of the increased production is reported to be a problem, but this is apparently only in the urban markets such as Bangkok which may not be able to absorb larger quantities than now. Other urban and rural markets may be able to absorb greater quantities, but probably only at a lower price than in Bangkok. It would, therefore, be necessary to lower the cost of production to maintain the level of profitability for the producer. Off-flavour has been reported to be a problem, but the introduction of known techniques of cleansing before marketing can remove the muddy flavour.
The cages presently used in Thailand are made of wood and the sizes vary, the more common size being 20 m^3, Families often live on floating homes to which the cages are attached. This facilitates the culture operations and protection of stocks. Farmers stock about 50 fingerlings of 8 to 10 cm length per cubic metre of cage. Although feeds and feeding regimes vary, a mixture of rice bran, broken rice, and trash fish in the ratio of 2:1.1 appears to be the most commonly used feed. Other feeds used include soybean waste and waste vegetables. A typical feeding rate may be 2 percent or less of the body weight per day. The mortality in the cages is very low and the normal yield is about 100 kg/m^3 for an 18-month growing period.
Fingerlings are produced in both government and private hatcheries. The farmers may also raise fry in their own farms or use fingerlings collected from the wild.
The culture techniques as presently practiced appear to be satisfactory, insofar as culture in running water environments is concerned. However, Thailand, as well as other countries of the region, is interested in the development of cage culture in lakes, reservoirs and other stagnant or semi-stagnant water bodies. It would therefore be necessary to develop suitable technologies for such types of culture.
4.2 Research Needs
(i) Economic evaluation of currently adopted culture practices to determine the elements in production costs and the means to decrease them
(ii) Production tests, to test the feasibility of reducing production costs.
(iii) Study of the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the currently used cages and, if found necessary, improvement of their design or the introduction of new designs.
(iv) Formulation and testing of nutritionally balanced diets prepared with local ingredients.
(v) Development of culture technology for cage culture of Pangasius spp. in stagnant or semi-stagnant waters.
4. 3 Research Approach
The immediate research will be oriented to the reduction of production costs consistent with optimum production. This will involve use of different cage designs add materials, selected diet formulations and forms of feeds, feeding schedules, different stock densities, and water conditions. It will be necessary to carry out a series of experiments designed to test the effect of each of these factors as well as their interactions.
The above experiments will be carried out both in running water as well as stagnant and semi-stagant environments, in order to compare the results and determine the viability of such culture in the latter type of environment. Special attention will be devoted to the effect of stagnant and semi-stagnant water conditions on the health, survival, growth, and production of fish in the cages, as well as the effect of cage culture on the environmental conditions in the water body, with special reference to water quality and silting.
5. TRICHOGASTER CULTURE IN RICE FIELDS
5.1 Background
5.2 Research Needs
5.3 Research Approach
5.1 Background
In Thailand, Trichogaster is primarily cultured in disused paddy fields, modified to form 5-ha ponds by construction of a peripheral ditch and an enlarged dike to maintain water depths greater than are necessary for rice production. In areas where such culture techniques are practiced, it has been found to be more profitable than rice farming. Currently, 100 000 ha are devoted to such types of culture in Thailand, with an annual production in excess of 20 000 tons. The total potential surface area is about 400 000 ha.
General farming procedures may be described as follows:
The peripheral ditch, 3 m wide and 80 cm deep, is filled with water and adult Trichogaster of 100 g size selected from the previous harvest are stocked in sufficient numbers to provide one pair of spawners for each 16 m of water surface. The pond is then flooded to a depth of 50 cm over the central platform area. Subsequent spawning results in fry densities of approximately 185/m. Emergent vegetation which grows rapidly in the centre part of the pond is mowed regularly and applied as green manure to enrich the pond. Other management practices involve changing of water in the pond. Fish are not fed. Harvesting is carried out after a 6-7 month growing period when the fish reach a marketable size of about 100 g. Fish survival, as well as yields, are very low, the latter being about 0.7 t/ha.
The low yields of Trichogaster in converted paddy fields may be due to low fecundity of the spawners and fry survival under the present culture system; poor water quality resulting from green manuring of the ponds and frequent high salinity; and an inadequate water supply.
Trichogaster is also raised in Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia. Improvement of the present culture system should enable expansion of its application in the region.
5.2 Research Needs
Research should focus on improving the ecosystem through new pond designs and the development of effective pond management procedures for increased fish yields.
(i) Design of ponds to ensure adequate supply of water.
(ii) Development of pond management procedures aimed at conserving water quality.
(iii) Investigation of the effects of changes in water chemistry (salinity and pH) on fertilization, hatching, and fry survival.
(iv) Determination of the feasibility of bi-culture; e.g., with Clarias or Puntius.
5.3 Research Approach
Research should be aimed at ecosystem management to increase the natural production while conserving water quality in the farming system. Experiments should be planned to study the effects of changes in water chemistry on fertilization, hatching, and fry survival, and to determine the feeding habits and food utilization of the cultured species.
6. POND CULTURE OF PUNTIUS
6.1 Background
6.2 Research Needs
6.3 Research Approach
6.1 Background
There are many species of Puntius in Asia but Puntius gonionotus is the most commonly cultivated species in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines. It has been recently introduced in India for experimental purposes. In Thailand it is extensively raised in paddy fields either in monoculture or polyculture with Indian carp (rohu) and common carp. Semi-intensive and intensive culture of Puntius in ponds is also practiced to a limited extent. In Malaysia, it is cultured with Chinese carps or tilapia. Puntius is also being raised in cages in reservoirs.
Puntius breeds easily in ponds and spawns three to four times a year. It is primarily a macrophyte feeder and has potential as an effective biological agent for the control of aquatic weeds. Being a prolific breeder it may be an excellent source of pituitary material for induced breeding of other fishes.
Seed production and pond culture of Puntius do not pose any major problems in Thailand. Pond fertilization results in yields of 2.4 tons/ha/year and supplementary feeding yields up to 6.0 tons/ha/year. In general, however, culture practices are extensive in nature and the level of operation is usually of subsistence scale with low productivity.
Puntius is easy to handle and lends itself to simple culture techniques which are adaptable to small-scale farming systems. The cost of production is relatively low. Because of these attributes, the general transfer of improved technology has broad regional application. Upgrading of existing pond culture techniques is, therefore, of utmost importance.
6.2 Research Needs
To increase present levels of production, there is a need to study various pond management techniques which would provide optimum output per unit area at minimum cost, using monoculture and polyculture systems. The reproductive cycle of the fish should be further studied with a view to utilizing it for pond management. Being a macrophyte feeder this species has potential as a weed control agent and it would be useful to determine its efficiency for conversion of different species of macrophytes.
As mentioned earlier, Puntius can be a good source of pituitary material as it breeds several times a year. Puntius pituitary was found to be effective on catfish and Asiatic carps. It will be useful to develop procedures for the farming of Puntius as a source of pituitary at the farm level.
Intensification of pond culture systems requires additional inputs in terms of feeds and fertilizers. Studies on the optimum level of these inputs, their quality and quantity yielding the highest profit per unit cost of production, would be necessary. Information on these aspects would provide the farmer with alternative production levels.
6.3 Research Approach
Research on the pond culture of Puntius will be directed toward increasing the levels of production under extensive, semi-intensive, and intensive monoculture and polyculture systems at minimum production costs. Emphasis will be laid on developing pond management techniques that would take advantage of the biological characteristics of the species such that maximum growth is attained within the shortest possible period of rearing without overcrowding due to natural reproduction in the pond. Pond culture technologies that allow a number of production options in relation to soil and water quality conditions, as well as local weather, broad climatic situations, and levels of production inputs, would be developed.
Research on the use of various macrophytes as feed for Puntius and their conversion rate is essential in the culture of the species. Not only would this be useful in cutting down feed costs, but would also provide relevant data on the effectiveness of Puntius as a weed control agent in natural bodies of water as well as in ponds. Studies to assess the potential of Puntius as a donor of pituitary material for induced breeding of other species of fish shall also be conducted.
7. MUSSEL CULTURE
7.1 Background
7.2 Research Needs
7.3 Research Approach
7.1 Background
Mussel culture is carried out on mud-flats with water depths of up to 7 metres using palm stakes. The mussels are harvested at 8 months, yielding about 40 tons/ha. No thinning-out is practiced during the growing period.
Spat is transplanted from one location to another according to phytoplankton availability. Pollution of mussel grounds by domestic and industrial effluents has become a major problem.
The price of mussels is Baht 8-15 for a 15 kg bucket in Thailand. Apart from serving the culinary needs of the human population, small mussels are also used increasingly in preparing feeds for Macrobrachium, and as scratch feed for duck production.
Large coastal areas are available for expansion of mussel culture and very large quantities can be produced. The level of production technology used in Thailand is not high and there is considerable scope for improving traditional culture practices.
7.2 Research Needs
(i) Identification and mapping of polluted areas unsuitable for mussel production.
(ii) Hydrobiological studies to identify most productive areas for mussel production (seed and growing).
(iii) Introduction of thinning procedures and spacing of mussels on substrate for improved growth and production.
(iv) Experiments in rope and net hose culture.
7.3 Research Approach
Surveys of potential mussel farming areas will result in the mapping of suitable areas, and those that should be avoided. Experimental work on thinning procedures should be designed to determine the increase in size of product, overall yield, and profit that can be obtained against increased labour and other costs.
Rope and net hose culture experiments will be carried out in different types of environments to assess the increased survival, growth and yield that can be obtained and the cost of inputs needed for the purpose.
8. OYSTER CULTURE
8.1 Background
8.2 Research Needs
8.3 Research Approach
8.1 Background
There are ten species of oysters in Thailand of which three are under commercial cultivation. Primary culture areas are in the Cholburi and Chanthaburi areas covering approximately 1 000 ha of shallow coastal waters. A wide range of suitable oyster rearing areas exists elsewhere in the region and the opportunities for expansion of culture practices are goad.
Spat are collected from nature during the spawning periods from May to November on concrete tube sections, concrete blocks, or rods placed in selected growing areas. Typical spat set is 1/cm^2.
Sites for growing oysters are selected on the basis of empirical knowledge of established productive growing areas. Oysters are harvested at 10 months of age when sizes of 6-12 cm are reached. Harvests average 4 oysters/100 cm^2 of substrate area. Yields from production areas may average 10 t/ha of surface area,
Problems associated with oyster culture in Thailand include fouling of substrate by barnacles reducing spat set, and pollution from human activities. At the current price of Baht 40/kg for small sizes and Baht 70-100/kg for large sizes (in the shell), oyster culture is a lucrative operation. Large potential exists for expansion of production in unpolluted areas.
8.2 Research Needs
The current low yields per hectare point to the possibility for significant improvement in culture practices such as improved spat collection, thinning and transplanting. On-bottom culture techniques may be tried under local conditions to obtain improved size and conditions of oysters and overall survival and yields. Identification of the major predators and fouling organisms and the development of suitable methods for controlling them, should receive special attention.
8.3 Research Approach
Surveys carried out in connection with mussel culture investigations will yield the necessary information on sites suitable for oyster culture. Improved methods of spat collection, thinning, and transplantation have to be tried. Comparative experiments in hanging culture techniques, particularly rope culture, should be undertaken to determine cost-effectiveness and improved product quality that can be achieved by the introduction of new techniques. Besides evaluating the efficiency of the new techniques in controlling predation and fouling, experimental work must also be undertaken on other methods of controlling them.
<section>2</section>
PART II - OUTLINE RESEARCH PROGRAMME FOR THE LEAD CENTRE IN THE PHILIPPINES - REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, ILOILO, THE PHILIPPINES
1. INTRODUCTION
2. SOME GENERAL PROBLEMS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS
3. SHRIMP CULTURE IN PONDS
4. MILKFISH CULTURE IN PONDS
5. CULTURE OF MULLETS AND OTHER BRACKISHWATER FISH IN PONDS
1. INTRODUCTION
The Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) is one of the four regional lead centres participating in the Regional Network of Aquaculture Centres to carry out regional research, training and information activities under the UNDP/FAO Regional Project RAS/76/003. The main farming systems selected for studies at the Centre are: (i) shrimp culture in ponds, and (ii) pond culture of milkfish, mullets and other brackishwater fish.
Following the procedure adopted for formulation of research programmes of other regional centres, the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) assigned a task force to prepare an outline programme in consultation with the research leaders of the Centre, extension workers of the Bureau of Fisheries, and private farmers. The team consisted of Dr. K.W. Chow, Mr. H.L. Cook, Dean R.O. Juliano, Dr. T.V.R. Pillay and Dr. H.R. Rabanal. Dr. C. Lim and Dr. C.T. Villegas of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department, and Mr. R. Edra and Mrs. S. Seville of the Philippine Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) also participated. The task force had opportunities to discuss with some of the leading fish pond operators (Mr. C.S. David, Mr. C. de los Santos, Mr. T. Jamandre, Jr.) the major problems currently faced in brackishwater pond farming and the type of assistance they expect from research institutions. It was also able to study a list of problems for research in
brackishwater aquaculture that the Iloilo Fish Producers Association, Inc. had submitted to the SEAFDEC Center. Some of the senior research workers of SEAFDEC (Dr. F. Pascual, Mrs. J.H. Primavera, Dr. F. Lacanilao, Dr. L. Benitez, and Mr. M. Lijauco), and of the University of the Philippines (U.P. College of Fisheries) Brackishwater Aquaculture Centre in Leganes, Iloilo (Dr. A.S. Camacho and Dr. R.D. Fortes) and Dr. N Hoshino of SEAFDEC attended discussions on certain aspects. They reported on their on-going and proposed investigations. The task force had several discussions with Mr. Felix R. Gonzales, Director of BFAR, concerning details of the organization of research and training under the regional project.
The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department is currently in the process of reorganization and considerable streamlining of its varied activities is expected. The Department had prepared a list of selected research projects to be implemented in 1980. It is of special interest to note that this list was prepared in consultation with some of the leading fish pond operators in the area and is based on problems encountered in commercial-scale farming. The task force could therefore use this as a basis for considering longer-term research needs and possibilities of multidisciplinary approach for problem solving.
The general time-frame considered for the research programme was, as in the case of other regional centres under the project, a two-year start-up period followed by a five-year period of concentrated research. The task force has identified research needs and proposed research approaches. It is envisaged that the detailed design of studies and experiments will be prepared by designated research teams with the help of international consultants as required.
The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department has specialized laboratories for research on many disciplines involved in aquaculture, although all of them do not have adequate staff with the required training and experience. The quantum of trained staff is increasing as a result of the staff training programme initiated in earlier years. The collaboration that has been developed with the U.P. College of Fisheries has made it possible to utilize a certain number of graduate students for individual investigations.
There is a need to increase or improve the scientific manpower of the Department, and the task force feels that this can be accomplished through:
(a) assignment of international experts, mainly on a short-term basis to plan and initiate research and making available their services, if need be, during the course of investigations to solve problems faced in the studies and/or towards the end of the investigations to evaluate and interpret the results;
(b) arrangement for short-term training of researchers in other institutions in specific research techniques; and
(c) secondment of associate scientists from other participating countries of the regional project under the programme of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC).
Among the disciplines in which the Department needs strengthening are: aquaculture engineering and pond management, nutrition and feed development, diseases and health of cultivated species, and economics. It will be necessary to obtain specialized external assistance to build up the necessary facilities and manpower for effective multidisciplinary research and guidance.
The need for multidisciplinary approach and team work for solving problems has been now well recognized in the Department. Such team work has to be further developed, particularly in yield trials where the effect of several interdependent variables can be studied simultaneously, if the experiments are properly designed and carried out by teams of specialists. Special mention has to be made of the need for incorporating economic evaluation in the design of all relevant experiments. Such a procedure may enable the maximum use of available production pond facilities in the farm leased by the Department at Leganes.
It is necessary to increase the number of production ponds for conducting factorially designed experiments. On the completion of the current negotiations for the extension of lease for the Leganes farm, it is hoped that additional production ponds can be constructed, with funds requested for this purpose from the Government of the Philippines. The additional ponds will enable expanded yield trials, with adequate numbers of replications.
Most of the laboratories of the Department seem to have the essential equipment for the type of studies proposed to be carried out. The only major item of equipment considered necessary on a high priority basis, is a feed mill to produce the required quantities of feeds for production experiments.
2. SOME GENERAL PROBLEMS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS
There are some problems common to all systems of pond farming in brackishwater environments. One of the most important among these is the nature of the soil in which ponds are built. Most of the tidal flats and mangrove swamps that are used for pond construction have highly acidic soils. Ponds built on such soils show retarded growth of benthic organisms that have to be raised as food for milkfish, mullets and shrimps, as also poor water quality, causing large-scale mortalities. Leaching of sulphates from the soil by repeated flushing, followed by liming and organic fertilization, are the only methods presently available to remedy this condition and it may take four years or longer before a pond becomes sufficiently productive. This imposes a major economic burden on the farmer and adversely affects the feasibility of most types of pond farming in brackishwater areas. Recent work in the U.P. Brackishwater Aquaculture Center has provided some useful information on chemical
processes in acid sulphate soils, including nutrient release and its effect on algal growth. In view of the importance of the problem, there is a need for concentrated research to develop more rapid methods of pond soil treatment.
Culture in brackishwater ponds has traditionally been based on the production of lab-lab or benthic algal complex, for which appropriate water management has to be practiced. Generally the water level has to be kept shallow. Raising of an adequate crop of the desired species of algae by proper fertilizing with organic or inorganic fertilizers or a combination of the two plus water management, and maintaining the crop at the required level, needs considerable skill on the part of the farmer. Fertilizers, both organic and inorganic, are becoming either scarce or too expensive. There is, therefore, now a trend towards the use of artificial feeds, particularly as a supplement to natural foods.
The cost of fertilization is not always as low as is often believed; in brackishwater ponds in the Philippines, it is reported to vary between 25 and 60 percent of the cost of fish production. Agricultural waste products or other feed stuffs are now used as supplemental feeds wherever available, without any processing. Preliminary experiments have shown that milkfish and shrimp can be fed moist as well as dry pelleted feeds. However, a major constraint remains the availability of processed feeds.
Aquaculture has invariably to compete with the more established livestock industry for feed ingredients. Furthermore, unlike commercial animal husbandry, commercial fish farming in the region is not served by an efficient feed processing industry. Fish feeds, when used, are mostly prepared at farm sites, often lacking adequate facilities for quality control of diets. Also, the choice of feed ingredients available to the fish farmer is limited and, because of the smaller quantities involved, have to be purchased at higher prices. Both these factors increase the cost of the prepared feeds. Other problems associated with feed development are: (a) inadequate knowledge of the nutritional requirements of the species under culture, and (b) very limited knowledge of the nutritive value of indigenous feed ingredients. This necessitates the provision of wide margins of safety for setting nutrient levels as well as for the use of locally available ingredients in diet formulation.
Fish feed development that meets the objective of producing efficient composite diets from-local raw materials, therefore, merits high priority in brackishwater aquaculture research in the region. Detailed surveys of the availability and cost of feed ingredients, and laboratory studies to determine the nutritional requirements of the cultured species, will have to be carried out to provide the basis for feed development.
A third common problem of significance in brackishwater pond farming is water management. Traditional forms of brackishwater pond culture have depended on tides for filling and draining of ponds. However, in many situations, pumping has to be resorted to for water management and the present fuel costs make this extremely expensive. It will greatly benefit aquaculture if alternative sources of energy can be found for pumping. The results of some of the on-going work in certain centres for the development of solar or wind-driven pumps could prove valuable for aquaculture Pumps and windmills developed for irrigation could be modified, if necessary, and tested for filling and draining fish and shrimp ponds. The use of such unconventional energy should also be tried for aeration of ponds as well as for the operation of indoor hatcheries and rearing systems.
A problem common to most forms of brackishwater aquaculture is the lack of adequate economic data necessary for the evaluation of culture techniques and for development planning. The optimum size of ponds and the minimum economic size of farms have yet to be determined. While the most suitable size of ponds will have to be decided on the basis of a sufficiently large number of comparative experiments, extensive data on commercial operations will have to be collected for evaluating the minimum required size of farm under a given set of conditions to yield the best cost-benefit ratio.
3. SHRIMP CULTURE IN PONDS
3.1 Background
3.2 Research Needs
3.3 Research Approach
3.1 Background
In the traditional brackishwater pond culture of shrimp, widely practiced in Asia, production is dependent on the seasonal abundance of wild fry. In many cases, the ponds are very shallow and water temperature and salinity become so high that large-scale mortality occurs. Predation by extraneous fish that gain access to the ponds also accounts for considerable loss of shrimps. Fertilizers and feeds are not generally used and as there are no suitable feeds available, production depends almost entirely on natural fertility. Consequently, yields are low, generally in the range of 100 to 300 kg/ha/year.
Some improvements in the traditional method of culturing shrimp have been evolved. For instance, by providing increased water depth in ponds more favourable temperatures can be maintained and mortality reduced. Production can be raised by increasing the stock density in ponds by catching shrimp from the wild and then stocking them in ponds. It has been demonstrated that nursery rearing of post-larvae before stocking them in growing ponds results in increased survival. This will undoubtedly result in increased yields, but production will still remain relatively low until research provides solutions to other more complex problems which limit production.
One of the most critical aspects is the availability of post-larval shrimp for stocking. It is generally very difficult to find a dependable source of post larvae for large-scale operations. When there is a scarcity of fry, as in the case of tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, the price becomes very high. When the fry are expensive they are stocked at a low density and grown to a large size. This increases risk considerably. If cheap fry were available, it would be possible to stock ponds at higher densities and harvest at a smaller size after a shorter growing period. Of course, the relative economic advantage of one system over the other must be considered, but at the present time, there is no option due to a lack of fry.
Considerable research has been done for developing shrimp hatcheries within the region, but procedures for commercial-scale hatchery operations are not yet fully developed. Present hatchery methodology utilizes live foods and as there are many problems concerned with their use, it will be advantageous to develop artificial feeds for use in the hatchery. In recent years progress has been made in maturing broodstock in captivity through the use of eyestalk ablation, but the percentage of females attaining maturity and the number of viable eggs obtained from them are still low.
Traditional shrimp culture is based on a number of species, and even in improved systems there may be benefits in using more than one species. For example, even though P. monodon is generally considered to be the best species for culture in the region, it may not be the most suitable species to grow in all locations at all times of the year. There are indications that in high salinity ponds, P. indicus might provide a higher return, and Metapenaeus ensis might be more suitable for low salinity ponds. Other factors to consider are that maturation in captivity is easier for some species than for others and that susceptibility to disease varies greatly from one species to another. Analysis must be made of the various trade-offs possible to evolve the most economic systems.
It is generally recognized that yield can be increased by increasing the natural productivity of ponds to supply increased amounts of food. There is sufficient information on how to promote growth of the benthic blue-green algae in shallow ponds. Unfortunately, this shallow type of pond is not suitable for growing shrimp because of the high temperature of pond water. Experimental work done so far has not led to reliable means of increasing the productivity of plankton in deeper brackishwater ponds. Such basic information as the proper ratio of nitrogen to phosphorus, and dose, frequency of application, remains to be determined.
Direct feeding is another way of increasing yield. However, adequate knowledge of the nutrient requirements of the various species of shrimp, necessary for formulating efficient diets, has yet to be obtained. Feeding, to date, is based almost entirely on waste or surplus products such as trash fish. These feedstuffs are not very efficient and if used in quantity tend to cause management problems by fouling the water.
In traditional forms of extensive shrimp culture, very few disease problems have been recognized. However, with the adoption of intensive culture methods, disease has become a major problem, especially in hatchery operations. Shrimps seem to be subject to infection by a variety of diseases, including bacterial, protozoan, fungal and viral infections. In many cases catastrophic mortalities occur. One very common occurrence reported in the region for which no causitive factor has been identified is persistent soft shell condition of shrimp grown in ponds.
3.2 Research Needs
Based on the problems encountered so far in the field, the needs for research on shrimp culture can be categorized into five, viz, hatchery development, development of nursery systems, improvement of grow-out systems, nutrition and feeds, and health. The specific needs are listed below. Besides these, genetic studies could play a major role in improving shrimp culture, but it is essential to determine in advance the objectives of genetic manipulation and the characters that need to be studied such as easier maturation, growth rate, food conversion, resistance to disease, etc. for obtaining useful results. The task force was of the view that studies of this nature should await progress in some of the other aspects, which would provide the basis for determining its orientation.
Besides Penaeus monodon, the proposed research will cover other species widely distributed in the region, including P. indicus, P. semisulcatus, P. merguiensis and Metapenaeus ensis.
The major research needs are:
(i) Refinement of techniques for (a) maturing broodstock in captivity, and (b) hatchery operation.
(ii) Improvement of traditional earthen pond nursery system, with special reference to production and maintenance of food supply and water management.
(iii) Development of tank or raceway systems for intensive post-larval rearing, using artificial feeds.
(iv) Determination of chemical parameters of importance in the productivity of production ponds and their inter-relationships
(v) Methods of improving the management of production ponds, including pond preparation, control or elimination of pests, predators and competitors, and pond aeration.
(vi) Development or comparison, including economic studies, of grow-out systems, viz, 'plankton pond' culture, 'lab-lab pond' culture and pond culture with intensive feeding.
(vii) Determination of the relative efficiencies and economics of monoculture and polyculture.
(viii) Improved methods for mass production of algae and zooplankton as food in hatcheries and nurseries.
(ix) Study of etiology and treatment of diseases and health problems of shrimps in hatcheries, nurseries, and production ponds and the development of methods for regular health monitoring in culture establishments.
3.3 Research Approach
As mentioned earlier, the proposed research, plus field surveys and observations, need a multidisciplinary approach, involving team work by specialists in the disciplines concerned. Since many of the factors to be studied are inter-dependent, it should be possible to study a number of parameters simultaneously, so as to obtain reliable results and to make the best use of research facilities and personnel.
Most of the shrimp culture research in SEAFDEC has concentrated on P. monodon. It has been recently expanded to include P. indicus and P. merguiensis, may be started in the near future. Work on P. semisulcatus may be started in the near future.
The age of broodstock and their nutrition are two aspects that should receive attention in efforts to improve the percentage of individuals that respond to the eyestalk ablation method for maturation! Brood shrimps of different age groups fed with different live and compounded feeds may be used for maturation studies. The feasibility of maturation in ponds and in net cages installed in ponds should be tested and comparison made with maturation and spawning in tanks.
The effect of water quality on maturation, hatching and larval survival as observed at typical hatchery sites, will have to be evaluated to develop reliable criteria for selecting hatchery sites. Development of a suitable artificial feed for larvae should receive high-priority attention. The efficiency of artificial feeds should be evaluated not only in terms of growth, condition and survival of larvae, but also in terms of the economics and convenience of operations. Through appropriate experiments, the effect of different variables such as tank size and design, larval density, feeds and feeding, and management procedures should be evaluated. The conditions under which infections such as that caused by the fungus Lagenidium sp. became epidemics should be determined and suitable control measures tested.
For the improvement of nursery systems, comparative tests of different tank and raceway designs will be needed. The relative efficiencies of indoor and outdoor nurseries have to be determined. Efforts may be made to increase the optimum stocking density of post-larvae by providing additional substrates for growth of natural food in nurseries. Based on experimental studies, widely applicable nursery management procedures should be evolved.
In studies aimed at the improvement of grow-out systems, the advantages and disadvantages of polyculture of shrimps with milkfish or other finfish should be evaluated. The use of deeper ponds with intensive feeding, and ponds with fertilization and only supplementary feeding, should be compared with mono- and polyculture in shallow lab-lab ponds, with and without supplementary feeding.
When feed development work has made sufficient progress, more intensive systems of farming with complete feeding and aeration can be tried, particularly with quick-growing species like P. monodon.
Experimental work incorporating appropriate economic evaluation will be necessary to test the feasibility of increasing the number of crops of quick-growing species such as P. monodon in grow-out ponds, by reducing the growing period and harvesting the shrimps at a smaller size. The feasibility of rotating the culture of different species of shrimps based on seasonal changes in salinity and temperature conditions should also be tested.
To determine the causes of some of the health problems like soft shell condition, both field observations (on water quality changes, feed and feeding) and controlled experiments will be needed.
4. MILKFISH CULTURE IN PONDS
4.1 Background
4.2 Research Needs
4.3 Research Approach
4.1 Background
4.1.1 Seed production and supply
4.1.2 Sites for ponds
4.1.3 Pond management techniques
4.1.4 Food and feeding
4.1.5 Pond design and engineering
4.1.6 Causes of mortality
4.1.7 Economics
4.1.8 Polyculture
The milkfish (Chanos chanos) is a widely cultivated species in Indonesia, the Philippines, and Taiwan (China). Some 200 000 ha in Indonesia, 180 000 ha in the Philippines, and 30 000 ha in Taiwan or an overall total of 410 000 ha are being utilized for farming milkfish. The average annual production in these areas varies from 500 to 2 000 kg/ha/year; a total production of 286 000 metric tons per year is estimated for the entire region.
The culture techniques used are generally of the extensive type, characterized by minimum inputs and consequently low production. Although the industry is well-established, efforts to maximize production and increase return on investment have been hampered by a number of constraints.
4.1.1 Seed production and supply
The seed used for culture comes from the wild. As the species does not breed in ponds, some research institutions have devoted attention in recent years to its induced breeding by hormone administration. SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department has achieved some success in breeding the fish under experimental conditions, and a small number of fry obtained by induced breeding have been reared to adults in ponds. However, much further studies are needed to develop dependable methods for the mass production through induced breeding and hatchery rearing.
The availability of fry in natural collection grounds fluctuates widely from year to year, making supplies erratic. Also, the survival of wild fry is often poor. It is estimated that an average of 30 to 60 percent mortality occurs between capture and completion of nursery rearing. Fry catching gear often cause stress to the fry, resulting in high mortalities. Deficiencies in handling and storage techniques after capture, are also believed to cause additional mortalities. This high mortality, compounded by uncertainties in their abundance in collection grounds, leads to critical shortages of fry.
4.1.2 Sites for ponds
Even though during the last two decades culture of milkfish in net pens in a eutrophic freshwater lake has attained commercial proportions, the most common method continues to be pond culture.
Mangrove swamps, estuarine areas and open tidal flats are the sites generally utilized for the construction of milkfish ponds. The use of mangrove areas as fishpond sites is a subject of some controversy as it is believed that such areas serve as breeding and nursery grounds for species which are economically important in capture fisheries, especially the penaeid shrimps, and some finfishes. Utilization of these swamps for fishpond construction in the region varies from as high as 40 percent (Philippines), to a fraction of a percent (Indonesia, Malaysia). There is now an increasing understanding of the type of mangrove areas that should be conserved as nursery grounds or for environmental reasons and the areas that can be utilized for fishpond development without environmental damage.
The problem of acid soils in brackishwater ponds has already been referred to. Water quality is another factor of major importance in pond management. It is believed that poor water quality has probably caused greater mortalities than predators and diseases.
4.1.3 Pond management techniques
While a number of pond management techniques and variations of these are presently in use, two of them can be considered as predominant. One is based on the use of benthic algae in relatively shallow ponds or the 'lab-lab method', and the other is based on the use of plankton in relatively deeper ponds or what may be called the 'deep water' or 'plankton method'. Very often these two methods are used in succession. Operations of both methods may be affected by site elevation, pond design, prevailing weather, and management practice adopted by the operator. Filamentous algae or lumut method in medium-depth ponds used to be one other management technique, but this has now been practically discontinued. Because of the shallow depths in lab-lab ponds, there are space limitations. It cannot be easily practised in areas where there are no distinct dry and wet seasons. Maintaining a good growth of lab-lab calls for special skill on the part of the farmer in water management and
fertilization. The plankton method is of more recent origin. While encouraging results have been obtained in some instances, there are cases when the anticipated high production could not be obtained. The reasons for this have yet to be ascertained.
4.1.4 Food and feeding
In the wild, larvae of Chanos chanos feed primarily on zooplankton. Older fry also feed on phytoplankton. Chanos chanos under culture, subsist on plankton or benthic algae (lab-lab) depending on availability. The development of gill rakers of fry has not been closely studied to determine at what stage they become fully functional and to what extent the fry can utilize various species and sizes of planktonic organisms.
In some places, fry caught in the wild and stocked in ponds are often fed cooked egg yolk for 5 to 7 days. Afterwards the young fish feed on phytoplankton or algae maintained at suitable levels by fertilization of the ponds.
In grow-out ponds, artificial supplementary diets consisting of such common feed ingredients as rice bran and oil seed meal, have been tested with variable results. Data on growth rate and feed efficiency when fed on artificial diets are very scanty. Knowledge on the nutrition of the species is also very limited.
As mentioned earlier, the species has been spawned in captivity, but the survival of larvae and fry is still very low.
4.1.5 Pond design and engineering
Traditionally, ponds for milkfish were crudely constructed and were not based on sound engineering principles or design. However, in recent years, different layout plans, construction specifications and designs are being adopted to improve management. Development of more definitive criteria for site selection and pond construction under different land elevations, tidal characteristics and soil and vegetation characteristics, remains to be done.
4.1.6 Causes of mortality
Deterioration of water quality is a major cause of milkfish mortality in ponds. Studies that can lead to the development of standard techniques to prevent mortality are required.
Under current management, mortalities due to predation still occur. This has been partly solved through techniques, including the use of chemical pesticides, which in turn have now become a problem of significance.
Mortalities due to diseases and parasites are believed to be rare in pond culture of milkfish. However, with the increase of stocking rates and intensification of culture, there is every possibility of increased mortalities. It is also suspected that some of the unexplained mortalities presently occurring may be actually caused by diseases, which go undiagnosed due to lack of know-how.
4.1.7 Economics
In spite of the long existence of the industry, detailed economics of the farming systems as a whole, or of the operations involved such as fish seed production, nursery, grow-out, etc. Or the management innovations (fertilization, feeding, etc.) have scarcely been studied.
The most economic size of production ponds, or the minimum economic size of pond farms have yet to be determined.
4.1.8 Polyculture
Even though traditionally the practice has been monoculture, the extensive nature of operations led to a form of polyculture as evidenced by the presence of sizeable quantities of extraneous species in harvests (e.g. shrimps, mullets, siganids, seabass, grouper, spadefish, tilapia, etc.). In recent years many farmers have adopted some form of intentional polyculture However, this is not based on proven biological principles. Optimum stocking rates and appropriate species combinations have not yet been determined.
4.2 Research Needs
(i) Studies to reduce mortality of milkfish fry obtained from the wild through improvement in capture gear and methods of handling and storage.
(ii) Development of methods to reduce mortality in the nursery stage by using new rearing techniques and proper feeds.
(iii) Studies to compare relative effectiveness of culture in grow-out ponds based on natural food dependent on natural fertility alone and/or with fertilization to grow benthic algae in shallow ponds (lab-lab method), and with fertilizers to grow phytoplankton in deep water ponds (plankton method).
(iv) Studies to determine the economies of new innovations in design (modular or progression) and other improvements in pond layout (reduced area, increased depth, provision for water circulation in canals, etc.).
(v) Development of techniques of milkfish/penaeid shrimp polyculture
(vi) Development of rapid and more efficient methods of conditioning acid soils for milkfish culture.
(vii) Determination of the causes of unexplained mass mortalities through studies on water quality, control of predators and identification and prevention of diseases.
(viii) Studies on the species composition of natural food and their relative contribution in milkfish nutrition.
(ix) Development and testing of artificial larval diets to replace natural live foods.
(x) Development and testing of balanced diets or supplemental feeds, using readily available and inexpensive indigenous feed ingredients.
(xi) Development and testing of artificial diets for broodfish.
(xii) Investigations on management and economics of feeding in a semi-intensive Culture system, using supplemental feeds.
4.3 Research Approach
A wide variety of research activities are involved and the lead centre may have to use, beside its own facilities, farm facilities of the BFAR Extension Centres and of private operators in the country, to carry out the necessary experiments and testing. Close collaboration of the U.P. Brackishwater Aquaculture Center is envisaged for certain studies. SEAFDEC has an on-going programme of research on milkfish culture, hatchery, natural seed production and pond culture, supported by IDRC. The research approach described below relates to the directions in research to be done on a medium/long-term basis in the region. The continuation or expansion of the support for the proposed research from IDRC or other agencies is expected.
(i) Research to reduce mortality of fry obtained from the wild during capture, or Storage and in nursery rearing can be done in stages as follows:
(a) Study of existing fry-catching gears and development of new gears for increased efficiency and reduction of stress on the fry.
(b) Study present methods of handling, holding, transport and storing of fry to develop methods for increasing survival by improving water quality and by feeding.
(c) Develop better nursery techniques.
(ii) Detailed studies will be conducted to compare the two management methods (lab-lab method and plankton method) in grow-out ponds.
(iii) Improvement of grow-out methods will be attempted through:
(a) Better understanding of the chemistry of acid sulphate soils, based upon which more effective soil conditioning can be developed.
(b) Identification of water quality conditions that promote most suitable natural food of milkfish.
(c) Diagnosis and control of diseases and eradication of pests.
(d) Development of effective methods of fertilization for brackishwater ponds.
Based on the results of experimental work and the experience accumulated by the industry, criteria will be developed for site selection and pond designs for milkfish farming, including appropriate size of ponds and minimum size of farms under given conditions.
(vi) Development and evaluation of feeds for larvae and fry. Studies will be made to determine the stage at which gill rakers become fully functional for the purpose of improving feeding procedures.
(v) The development of suitable artificial diets for fry and fingerlings will entail the following: (a) determining the nutrient requirements and metabolism, and studies on digestive enzymes in response to feeding; (b) evaluation of hitherto untested, inexpensive, and readily available feed ingredients of known nutrient composition for acceptability by the species followed by least-cost formulation of practical balanced diets incorporating these new feed ingredients; (c) applying feed processing technology to produce diets that possess commercial attributes and are acceptable in form and size to the animals; (d) testing of experimental diets and measuring growth rates and feed efficiency; (e) development of feeding techniques and designing dispensers for such artificial feeds; and (f) evaluating the cost effectiveness of artificial feeding.
(vi) Development of artificial diets for broodfish with the purpose of inducing early sexual maturity.
(vii) The economics of feeding supplementary artificial diets along with plankton and benthic algae will be studied to determine the cost effectiveness.
(viii) Comparative experiments to determine whether polyculture of milkfish with shrimps, or mullets, will be advantageous from the point of view of productivity or economic benefit.
5. CULTURE OF MULLETS AND OTHER BRACKISHWATER FISH IN PONDS
5.1 Research Needs
5.2 Research Approach
While milkfish farming is a well-developed industry, it is largely restricted to the Philippines, Indonesia and Taiwan (China). Its acceptance as a food fish being restricted in the region, the task force also considered the culture of other brackishwater fish that have regional importance. Although not extensively practiced within the region, mullet culture is of some significance at present, and has potential for development in most countries of the region. It is much more widely accepted as a food fish than is milkfish.
There are many species of mullets, some of which are slow-growing or attain only a small size. The most widely distributed and fast growing species is Mugil cephalus and this species has been the focus of studies in a number of research institutions around the world. M. cephalus does not breed in the confined waters of ponds and most of the culture presently done is based on wild fry collected from estuarine and foreshore areas. The species has been induced to breed by the administration of pituitary and other hormones and sometimes only by environmental manipulation. Larvae have been reared under experimental conditions, but very high mortality occurs from the critical period when the yolk absorption is completed to about the 40th day after hatching. The reasons for the mortality are not yet determined. Fry of experimentally bred fish have been grown in ponds to adults fed with natural food and supplemental feed. However, this type of culture is still in the early stages of
experimentation. The widely adopted system of culture is based on naturally occurring fry, which can be collected in large numbers in most areas. In the early stages of their life, it is often difficult to distinguish the different species. A dependable and rapid method of fry identification and sorting has yet to be developed, to enable the rearing of only selected species.
There are strong similarities between milkfish and the major species of estuarine mullets in their habits? including tolerance of salinity and feeding habits. Therefore, the design of ponds, fertilization and feeding methods and general pond management measures adopted for the milkfish seem to be applicable also to mullets. The nursery and production experiments proposed for milkfish will have to be repeated in the case of mullets. There is also the need to make comparative studies of culture in the so-called plankton and lab-lab ponds' to determine their relative efficiencies in productivity and economics. Although more than one species of mullet may have to be cultured together for reasons of availability of fry, there does not appear to be a strong case for polyculture with other species of fish commonly cultivated in the area, as they also have similar feeding habits.
Among species other than mullets that are of regional interest, the most important appears to be the seabass Lates calcarifer, which can be cultivated in brackish- as well as fresh water, grows well if fed adequately and has wide acceptability. It is a carnivorous species and would require suitable feeds, such as trash fish or compounded feeds, for culture. Alternatively, it may be possible to combine its culture with that of a forage fish, such as tilapia. The seabass is a relatively high-priced species, and therefore very attractive for commercial-scale culture or small-scale culture operations meant for increasing the income of small-scale farmers or fishermen. In many areas fry can be collected from estuarine and coastal areas. The species has been bred under captivity and hatchery procedures have been successfully adopted. Large-scale commercial hatcheries are now being developed in Thailand.
5.1 Research Needs
(i) Development of methods for controlled reproduction of quick-growing species of mullets and mass rearing of their larvae.
(ii) Development of rapid and practical methods of fry identification and sorting, pending the development of controlled reproduction and hatchery production of seed.
(iii) Determination of the type of ponds (lab-lab type versus plankton type) most suited for mullet culture and the applicability of milkfish pond management procedures in mullet farming.
(iv) Development of compounded supplemental feeds for mullets and their evaluation.
(v) Methods of monitoring health and disease problems of mullets and disease control.
(vi) Refinement of controlled breeding of seabass and techniques of larval rearing.
(vii) Collection, conditioning and transport of seabass fry from natural habitats.
(viii) Development of nutritionally adequate and economically acceptable artificial feeds for seabass.
(ix) Culture of seabass to marketable size with tilapia as forage fish.
(x) Culture of seabass with artificial feeds and evaluation of the economics of the practice.
(xi) Methods of monitoring health and disease problems of seabass and disease control.
5.2 Research Approach
Work is already underway in SEAFDEC on induced breeding and larval rearing of Mugil cephalus. This should be intensified and extended to other quick-growing species available in the area. Special attention has to be devoted to determine the causes of poor larval survival. Specially prepared larval feeds should be tried to determine whether larval mortality can be reduced by improved feeding.
Until such time that suitable methods for large-scale hatchery production of mullet fry become possible, it will be necessary to use wild fry for culture experiments. Attempts should be made to develop methods of fry sorting based on information on the seasonality of occurrence in nature and gross morphological characters. If this does not prove successful, growing the fry to a stage when they can be sorted by species for stocking production ponds will have to be tried.
As stated earlier, the research approach proposed for milkfish culture can be adopted with very little modifications for grow-out studies on mullets, both in mono- and polyculture with shrimps. Comparison of the economics of culturing large and small mullets should receive special attention, because of the problems of availability of the fry of desired species in different areas.
Work on seabass has to Start with the testing of techniques already developed elsewhere, The results of work on larval feeds in the Centre are expected to prove valuable in refining methods of hatchery production of fry.
The development of a suitable compounded feed based on locally available ingredients should receive high-priority attention, as trash fish, which is often used as feed in some areas, may not be readily available elsewhere. As an alternative, the production of forage fish in seabass ponds, or their production in separate forage fish ponds for feeding seabass, should be investigated.
Determination of stocking densities in nursery and production ponds, pond design and pond management measures, and health and disease studies, will be required to recommend suitable culture procedures. Economic evaluation should form an important part of each of the investigations proposed.
