<title>ADCP/REP/81/16 - Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes: A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Reproductive Physiology of </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Research needs for aquaculture development have been a subject of discussion in recent years. There is a general agreement that a multidisciplinary science in its early infancy, such as aquaculture, needs very substantial research inputs for the development of appropriate technologies. However, there are different views on the types of research to be carried out and how and where it should be carried out. The FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture (Kyoto, Japan, 1976) recommended that regional networks of aquaculture centres should be established to undertake coordinated research on culture systems selected for major production programmes. In response to this, the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) has in the last three years established a network of six regional centres to carry out inter alia multidisciplinary systems-oriented research on farming systems adopted for large-scale development in third world countries. Research in these centres
will be more of an applied nature, although basic studies may also be undertaken, if it is found to be necessary for solving problems faced in the application of the farming systems selected.
The Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) has since 1973 been considering the role of international research in aquacultural development. In its continuing discussions on the subject, centralized basic research was pointed out as a possibility to be explored. Reproduction physiology is probably one of the subjects most often cited as of major importance and requiring long-term basic studies. ADCP therefore requested Dr. B. Sundararaj, of the Delhi University to prepare a background paper on the state of knowledge on the reproduction physiology of cultivated teleost fishes, highlighting gaps in our knowledge and areas of future research that might benefit aquaculture science. We are grateful to Dr. Sundararaj for undertaking this task, despite his many other commitments. The paper and the accompanying bibliography, should prove of very great value in formulating research in this field. The views expressed
in the paper are of the author, and not necessarily those of ADCP or FAO.
Rome
July 1981
T.V.R. Pillay
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The propagation of fishes has been practised from time immemorial in different parts of the world. Aquaculturists, especially those involved in the rearing and propagation of fishes, have often the disadvantage of cultivating species, the seeds of which have largely to be captured from the wild. Techniques for production of adequate quantities of high quality fish seed from captive broodstock are necessary for large-scale expansion of aquaculture. The lack of such techniques has been an important constraint in successful culture of several cultivable species.
Paucity of basic information on the reproductive physiology of cultivated fishes has caused aquaculture to lag behind agriculture. Such information, whenever available, has played an important role in increasing fish yields and it is no coincidence that among the most successfully cultivated fishes are those on which the largest amount of basic information is available. In view of the importance and relevance of basic research on reproductive physiology of cultivated fishes for the expansion of aquaculture, work on many of these areas has been the subject of several reviews (Pickford and Atz, 1957; Dodd, 1960; Reinboth, 1972; Donaldson, 1973; de Vlaming, 1974; Fontaine, Y.A., 1975; Fontaine M., 1976; Harvey and Hoar, 1979; Peter and Crim, 1979).
The present review covers several aspects of endocrinology of reproduction in teleost fishes, principally those used for large-scale farming in Asia, Africa and Latin America (see Table 1), and which possess the greatest potential for aquaculture development in the countries of these regions.
A perusal of the. list of cultivated species (Bardach, Ryther and McLarney, 1972; Jhingran and Gopalakrishanan, 1974) reveals that among the world's fish species cultivated at present those inhabiting fresh water predominate. Of these, only a few species such as the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri; the common carp, Cyprinus carpio; the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis; the grey mullet, Mugil cephalus; and tilapia, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambicus, have been investigated in detail. Information available on many aspects of their reproductive physiology as well as that on other species is briefly described under appropriate headings.
This review has a dual purpose. First, to briefly discuss recent information on the reproductive physiology of fishes with emphasis on cultivated species and, secondly, to indicate areas of reproductive physiology where basic research needs to be carried out. Further, aspects of research that are directly or indirectly relevant to increasing our ability to breed cultivated fishes in captivity are highlighted.
The review begins with a consideration of teleost reproductive cycles highlighting the. role played by environmental stimuli in the regulation of these cycles. The appropriate sensory receptors located on the body of the fish convey information about environmental stimuli to the brain in the form of neural inputs. This neural information on reaching the hypothalamus causes the release of hypothalamic peptides, known as releasing hormones, which in turn stimulate the pituitary gland to release the gonadotropic hormone(s) which act on the gonads. The gonads in turn produce the sex steroid hormones which are responsible for the formation of gametes as well as for the regulation of secondary sexual characters, nuptial coloration and breeding behaviour.
<section>3</section>
2. REPRODUCTIVE CYCLES AND ENVIRONMENTAL CUES
2.1 Models of teleostean reproductive cycles
2.2 Reproductive cycles of other teleost groups
2.3 Photoperiod-thermoperiod relationship
A majority of teleost fishes are seasonal breeders, while a few breed continuously. Among the seasonal breeders, there is wide variation in the time of the year when breeding occurs. Fresh water temperate zone fishes spawn in spring and early summer, while others such as the salmonids do so in autumn. Fresh water fishes of the Murray-Darling river system of New South Wales, Australia, are stimulated to spawn when flood waters come into contact with dry soil (Lake, 1967). Similarly the fresh water fishes of the central Amazonian floodplain lakes spawn during the rainy season (Schwassmann, 1978). In the Indian subcontinent, a vast majority of the fresh water fishes breed during the monsoon season when rainfall is heaviest (Jhingran, 1975). The time of breeding of each species is so precisely timed that fry are produced in an environment in which the chances of survival are maximal. Natural selection possibly favours genomes of individuals that produce their young ones at a
time most suitable for survival.
Due to paucity of information, an integrated concept of the impact of environmental factors on the reproductive process of fishes has not yet emerged. Nevertheless, it is known that fishes integrate their physiological functions with environmental cycles. It is now clear that endogenous periodicities of physiological processes are responsible in part for seasonal reproduction (Bullough, 1951, 1959; Sundararaj and Sehgal, 1970a; Sundararaj, 1978). In addition, certain proximate environmental factors that act as cues for the approaching favourable season for reproduction impinge on the exteroceptors and, through them, affect the central nervous system, the pituitary and, finally, the gonads. It is through such environmental factors that the endogenous rhythm is brought into phase for the precise breeding time. The literature on this topic has been reviewed by Pickford and Atz (1957), Atz and Pickford (1964), Schwassmann (1971, 1978), de Vlaming (1972a, 1974), Donaldson (1973),
Sundararaj and Vasal (1976), Peter and Hontela (1978) and Peter and Crim (1979).
Photoperiod, temperature and seasonal rainfall, among other factors, are important in regulating reproductive cycles in teleost fishes. They show considerable but precisely-timed annual fluctuations in temperate regions, whereas in the tropics, dry seasons alternate with wet ones and lead to seasonal differences in water quality and food availability.
In many salmonids, that spawn in autumn, gradually increasing photoperiods followed by decreasing ones or even short photoperiods play a dominant role in the regulation of reproductive cycles. In cyprinid and perciform fishes, temperature may also be a significant regulatory factor in the reproductive cycling. Thus, even among teleost fishes, mechanisms for reproductive timing vary considerably. A comprehensive and meaningful assessment of the regulatory role of environmental factors on teleost reproductive cycles is not yet possible in view of the diverse experimental conditions, the lack of proper controls and the short-term nature of many of the experiments. Only 51 out of nearly 20 000 species of fishes have so far been experimented upon (see Htun-Han, 1977; Poston, 1978).
Nevertheless, it is possible to select a few teleost species that have been studied more intensively than others to serve as models for developing a working hypothesis for environmental regulation of reproductive cycles. They are the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis; the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri; and the brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis; the grey mullet, Mugil cephalus, and the common carp, Cyprinus carpio.
2.1 Models of teleostean reproductive cycles
2.1.1 Catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis
2.1.2 Rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri and brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis
2.1.3 Grey mullet, Mugil cephalus
2.1.4 Common carp, Cyprinus carpio
2.1.1 Catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis
The catfish, a native of India, Burma and Sri Lanka, is a seasonal breeder. Its annual gonadal cycle in the vicinity of Delhi (lat. 28°35'N; long. 77°12'E) comprises the preparatory (February to April), the prespawning (May to June), the spawning (July to August), and the postspawning (September to January) periods. Two consecutive sets of physiologic events intimately interwoven with environmental changes are involved in the completion of the circannual reproductive cycle in the catfish. The first set of events leads to the gradual enlargement of the gonads with concomitant vitellogenesis or spermatogenesis during the late preparatory-prespawning period, when in nature both the daily photoperiod and mean environmental temperature increase progressively (Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1970a; Sundararaj and Sehgal, 1970a, b, c; Sehgal and Sundararaj, 1970a, b; Sundararaj and Vasal, 1976; Vasal and Sundararaj, 1976). The second set of physiologic events, involving ovulation and
spawning of oocytes or spermiation, seems to be triggered by a consortium of environmental factors prevailing during the monsoon season (July to August) - the prime time for breeding in the environmental niche. The catfish as also other fishes living in these latitudes appear to anticipate the monsoon season by the preceding warm dry summer when photoperiod is long and temperatures are warm.
A significant increase in ovarian weights as well as in the formation of yolky oocytes can be brought about even during the preparatory period (ambient water temperature 15.5-17°C) by exposing the catfish to photoperiod regime of LD 12:12 or 14:10 for 36 days provided the water temperature is maintained at 25°C or above up to 34°C. The threshold temperature for the formation of yolky oocytes appears to be 25°C; the tempo of vitellogenesis increases at higher temperatures and comes to a virtual halt at lower ones. During the postspawning period (November) a significant increase in ovarian weight with concomitant vitellogenesis is observed only in catfish exposed to 30°C for 60 days, irrespective of photoperiod. Since this catfish regulates its body temperature by behavioural means (the preferred temperature is 31.3° to 32°C), it is not surprising that the rate of ovarian recrudescence is very rapid around 30°C (Vasal and Sundararaj, 1976, 1978). In the male catfish, the
optimum temperature for the onset and maintenance of spermatogenesis is 25°C and higher temperatures do not alter the tempo of spermatogenesis.
During the postspawning period, ovarian regression in the unspawned catfish is retarded more effectively by a temperature of 30°C than by cooler temperatures (25°C), regardless of photoperiod. Nevertheless, ovaries eventually regress in the first week of October (Vasal and Sundararaj, 1976). It is apparent that in this species termination of the reproductive phase is endogenously timed, and the postspawning ovarian regression is obligatory even under constant laboratory conditions. The annual ovarian cycle of the catfish is primarily influenced by seasonal temperature variations while photoperiod plays an important but facilitatory role.
Mature female catfish exposed for almost 3 years to continuous illumination (LL) or darkness.(.DD) at 25°C still show a circannual ovarian rhythm comparable to that seen in fish collected from nature (NL). However, there is a change in period length, at least in LL, as evidenced by the fact that the acrophase (period when ovarian weight is maximal) occurs earlier in LL than in DD or NL, and what is more important, the interval estimate of the circannual acrophase in LL does not overlap with the corresponding interval estimate for the data from NL. Thus the computed acrophase differences establish, at least indirectly, a circannual rhythm desynchronization (Sundararaj, Vasal and Halberg, 1973; Sundararaj, 1978). A circannual ovarian rhythm expresses itself, albeit slightly out of phase, even under constant environmental conditions. It appears that daylength and temperature act as synchronizers to bring the ovarian rhythm into phase.
Even though the catfish responds to photoperiod, the mechanisms involved in the measurement of daily photoperiod are not clear. Interruption of the scotophase (dark period) of a short day (LD 6:18) by 1 hour of light induces ovarian recrudescence that is significantly greater than that obtained in the control group exposed to LD 7:17. Obviously, the catfish has in addition to a circannual rhythm, a circadian rhythm of photosensitivity with two sensitive periods occurring between 16-17 h and 20-21 h after the onset of the daily photo-period (Vasal and Sundararaj, 1975).
Extensive basic research on the role of environmental factors in the regulation of breeding cycles of the catfish has been made use of to harvest multiple crops of eggs at monthly intervals in this species. Precociously gravid catfish obtained as early as April by photothermal treatment have been induced to spawn in the laboratory by administration of ovine luteinizing hormone (LH). Ripe eggs after fertilization hatched into seemingly normal fry. Further, the spent fish when subjected to the same photothermal treatment developed fresh crop of yolky eggs within one month; such gravid females have been again induced to spawn with LH. This process has been repeated so that the same set of fish has been spawned four times between April and July of the same year. Thus, it is possible to get catfish fry not only early but also in much larger numbers than usually available from each female during the spawning season (Anand and Sundararaj, 1974a; Sundararaj and Vasal, 1976). The
aquacultural potentialities of this laboratory observation are very considerable.
2.1.2 Rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri and brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis
In autumn-spawning rainbow trout, photoperiod is the main factor involved in gonadal development (Nomura, 1962; Goryczko, 1972; Kunesh et al., 1974; Breton and Billard, 1977; Poston, 1978; Whitehead et al., 1978a). In this fish, gametogenesis occurs in summer and autumn and is associated with decreasing photoperiod and possibly temperature (Billard and Breton, 1978; Billard et al., 1978). Long (LD 16:8) or short (LD 8:16) photoperiod and even continuous illumination do not induce gonadal recrudescence, whereas a decreasing photoperiod (from LD 16:8 to LD 8:16) from February to June induces full spermatogenesis and spermiation. Plasma gonadotropin levels and tempo of spermatogenesis are significantly elevated at decreasing photoperiods and warm (16°C) rather than at cool (8°C) temperatures showing that temperature is indeed a factor, though not limiting, in trout reproduction (Breton and Billard, 1977). Whitehead et al. (1978a, b) have advanced spawning by 6-12 weeks in
rainbow trout by exposing them to normal yearly photoperiod cycles condensed into 9 or 6 months at 9°C. These results show that telescoped or accelerated versions of the annual daylength cycle such as increasing followed by decreasing photoperiod induce earlier gonadal recrudescence in the rainbow trout. Photoperiod appears to be the major environmental factor involved in the sequence of endocrine events leading to spawning and suggests that it may act by modifying an inherent reproductive rhythm (see Billard et al., 1978).
In the brook trout, which also spawns in autumn, exposure to an accelerated light regime of increasing followed by decreasing photoperiods results in precocious functional maturity (Henderson, 1963; Carlson and Hale, 1973; Htun-Han, 1977).
2.1.3 Grey mullet, Mugil cephalus
The grey mullet in Hawaiian waters is a seasonal breeder and spawns during January and February. In nature, vitellogenesis commences shortly before the attainment of minimal day-length (Kuo, Nash and Shehadeh, 1974a, b; Kuo and Nash, 1975). The vitellogenic response to artificial photoperiod cycle has been examined by comparison of ovarian recrudescence in females exposed to either a condensed daylength cycle or a natural daylength cycle at ambient temperatures. The results show that constant short photoperiod regime of LD 6:18 was effective in stimulating vitellogenic oocytes within 49-62 days, whereas in controls, vitellogenic oocytes did not appear up until 235 days. Thus, in the mullet, ovarian recrudescence can be triggered out of season by a photoperiod-temperature combination of LD 6:18 at 21°C (Kuo and Nash, 1975). Kuo, Nash and Shehadeh (1974b) have successfully prolonged the breeding season of mullet to obtain ripe eggs throughout the year.
2.1.4 Common carp, Cyprinus carpio
In the common carp, the pattern of reproductive cycle is dependent more on temperature than on photoperiod. In Israel, the carp normally breeds in April and May (Moav and Wohlfarth, 1973). Maintenance of carp at a warm temperature (23°C) accelerates ovarian recrudescence and spawning (Gupta, 1975). In India, the common carp shows two main peaks of breeding activity in a year, once during spring and again in autumn when optimal thermal conditions prevail in nature. In France, the common carp spawns in the summer. Pituitary concentration of gonadotropin as measured by radio immunoassay, is low in winter and increases in spring at the time of gonadal recrudescence and in the spawning season (Billard and Breton, 1978). Plasma gonadotropin increases in late winter and decreases in spring when ovarian weights are highest (Billard et al., 1978). Spermatogenesis occurs in summer and early autumn and plasma and pituitary gonadotropins increase at this time. Spermiation takes place
from June to October but is blocked up until the following spring or summer when thermal conditions promote spawning. Therefore, gonadal development in the carp is associated with increasing temperature and spawning occurs when the temperature is at its maximum (Billard and Breton, 1978).
Bieniarz et al. (1978) reported that carps in Poland attain sexual maturity in 4-5 years and spawn in late May when water temperature reaches 18°C. Fresh vitellogenesis starts within 2 months after spawning and is associated with high serum levels of gonadotropin (July-September). Thereafter, the gonadotropin levels remain low but increase at the time of spawning. Atresia of oocyte is associated with the lowest levels of gonadotropin when water temperatures are below 14°C.
2.2 Reproductive cycles of other teleost groups
2.2.1 Tilapia
2.2.2 Indian major carps and Chinese carps
2.2.3 Snappers and groupers
2.2.4 Prochilodus sp. and Brycon sp.
2.2.5 Milkfish, Chanos chanos
2.2.6 Miscellaneous teleost species
2.2.1 Tilapia
Many species of the genus Sarotherodon (Tilapia) have been studied not only in the tropics but also in the equatorial zone. They show seasonal reproductive activity even though photoperiod and temperature are relatively constant throughout the year in the equatorial zone. Hyder (1970) reported that in Sarotherodon (Tilapia) leucosticta, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) nigra, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) zilli of the equatorial zone, testicular activity is restricted to autumn and winter, and testes and ovaries are in resting phase from July-September. Ovarian development occurs in Sarotherodon (Tilapia) leucosticta during the period of highest temperature and maximal sustained light. Spawning is associated with the period of highest temperature and onset of rainy season. The regulatory role of photoperiod is, however, not properly understood. However, at the same latitude, the duration of the breeding season varies with the altitude and possibly with temperature (Billard and Breton, 1978).
Increasing water temperature above 22°C induces ovarian growth and spawning in Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea (Fishelson, 1966). In Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea kept at 30°C, the plasma levels of testosterone, 11ß-hydroxytestosterone, 11-ketotestosterone and 11-deoxycorticosterone are considerably higher than in those kept at 18°C (Katz and Eckstein, 1974).
2.2.2 Indian major carps and Chinese carps
Indian major carps, Labeo rohita, Catla catla and Cirrhina mrigala, show gonadal recrudescence as early as March in Assam (lat. ca. 25°N), June in Orissa (lat. ca. 20°N) and July in other parts of India depending on their geographical location (Khanna, 1958; Jhingran, 1975). Since the Indian major carps show gonadal recrudescence from March to June, at a time when both photoperiod and temperature are increasing, it is surmised a posteriori that these two factors may be involved in initiating gonadal recrudescence. To date, experimental work has been conducted on only one species of Indian carp, Cirrhina reba, a closely allied species to the commercially important Indian major carps (see Verghese, 1967, 1970, 1975). Exposure of males and females to a long photoperiod (LD 14:10 or 18:6) at ambient temperatures (19° to 30°C) hastens gonadal recrudescence; males attain maturity earlier than females. However, when fish are subjected to gradually increasing photoperiod from LD
4:20 to 14:10 and finally to 20:4, females mature earlier than males at ambient temperatures, whereas at elevated temperatures (27.1° to 31°C), males mature earlier than females (Verghese, 1970). Further, males kept in constant darkness mature simultaneously with those under natural photoperiod, whereas in females, constant light hastens and constant darkness retards functional maturity (Verghese, 1975). Since the males of the Indian major carps show gonadal recrudescence earlier than females under natural conditions, it is surmised that the threshold temperature for testicular recrudescence is lower than that for ovarian recrudescence. Properly designed experiments with rigorously controlled photoperiod-temperature regimes have to be conducted to understand the relative roles of these two factors in gonadal recrudescence.
Chinese carps have been reared in temperate and tropical climes and they attain sexual maturity earlier in the tropical (2 years) than in the temperate waters (10 years). Warm temperatures and long photoperiod coupled with good diet are responsible for accelerated growth and gonadal maturity.
Spawning in the Indian major carps is precipitated by environmental factors that prevail during the rains or the monsoon season. However, in standing waters they develop the roe but do not spawn and this problem remains yet unsolved (see Sinha, Jhingran and Ganapati, 1974). In West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh, Indian major and Chinese carps spawn in wet 'bundh' type tanks where fluviatile conditions are simulated during monsoon rains (Dubey and Tuli, 1961; Sinha, Jhingran and Ganapati, 1974; Jhingran, 1975). Even though some attempts have been made to study the environmental factors that prevail in the bundhs at the time of spawning no definitive information is available. The role of sandy laterite, muddy or clayey soils in triggering spawning in wet and dry bundhs has not been studied. Rains bring about an increase in the level and velocity of flow of water, flooding of shallow areas, dilution of certain ions and concentration of others, changes in smell and taste of water,
as well as biotic parameters such as growth of algae and other green vegetation. Specific combinations of some or all of these factors are perceived through exteroceptors of fish and conveyed to the hypothalamus which then activates the pituitary to produce gonadotropin to induce maturation, ovulation and spawning.
Indian major carps, Labeo rohita, Catla catla, and Cirrhina mrigala, are known to breed only once a year during the monsoon season. However, after spawning had been induced by hypophysation in June, the spent fish became gravid again and could be spawned a second time by hypophysation (Bhowmick et al., 1977). Chen, Chow and Sin (1969) have reported multiple spawning cycles in a single year in Chinese carps in Malaysia. Bighead carp and silver carp have been spawned almost at monthly intervals in Malacca (Harvey and Hoar, 1979). These are encouraging observations and will help obtain more spawn from the same fish in one season. Similar work should be extended to other cultivated species to increase the availability of quality fish seed.
2.2.3 Snappers and groupers
Spawning in the groupers (Serranidae) and snappers (Lutjanidae) in the Caribbean is virtually confined to the period between January and May. But the peak in spawning is reached when the water temperatures are minimal between January and April (Munro et al., 1973) Arnold et al. (1978) have reported that the red snapper, Lutjanus campechanus, spawned in captivity when held at temperatures and photoperiods which approximated normal conditions in the Texas Gulf of Mexico region. They also observed multiple spawns in May and June. It is worthwhile extending such studies to other related cultivated fishes.
2.2.4 Prochilodus sp. and Brycon sp.
Important food fishes in the Central Amazonian floodplain lakes such as Prochilodus sp. and Brycon sp., spawn during the rainy season when the water level in the lake system begins to rise. Females have fully developed ovaries by January-February (Schwassmann, 1978).
2.2.5 Milkfish, Chanos chanos
Kuo and Nash (1979) have reported on the annual reproductive cycle of the milkfish in Hawaiian waters. It has a short breeding season between June and August and their data suggest a synchronous spawning behaviour.
2.2.6 Miscellaneous teleost species
The role of photoperiod and temperature in the reproductive cycling of other teleost species has been summarized by de Vlaming (1972a, 1974), Htun-Han (1977) and Peter and Crim (1979). In many temperate zone freshwater fishes that spawn in spring or early summer, gonadal recrudescence takes place in winter or spring in response to increasing photoperiod and rising temperatures, some fishes being more dependent on the one factor than on the other. In Phoxinus laevis (Bullough, 1939), Carassius auratus (Kawamura and Otsuka, 1950), Gambusia affinis (Medlen, 1951), Fundulus confluentus (Harrington, 1959), Etheostoma lepidum (Hubbs and Strawn, 1957), Cymatogaster aggregata (Weibe, 1968) and Heteropneustes fossilis (Vasal and Sundararaj, 1976) vitellogenic response is a function of warm conditions and seems to preclude any photoperiodic effect. However, warm temperature along with a long photoperiod augments gonadal development in Notropis bifrenatus (Harrington, 1957),
Gasterosteus aculeatus (Baggerman. 1957, 1972; Schneider, 1969), Oryzias latipes (Yoshioka, 1962, 1963), Sarotherodon (Tilapia) leucosticta (Hyder, Shah and Krischner, 1970), Lepomis cyanellus (Kaya and Hasler, 1972) and Notemigonus crysoleucas (de Vlaming, 1975b).
In the ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis, short photoperiod (LD 8:16 at 14°-19 C) accelerates and long photoperiod (LD 16:8 or 20:4 at 14°-19°C) retards maturation in both sexes and the minimum light intensity that retards maturation is 0.1 Lux for males and 0.2 Lux for females (Shiraishi, 1965a, b, d). Further, long wavelengths (red and yellow) retard gonad maturation, while short wavelengths (blue and green) accelerate gonadal maturation (see Shiraishi, 1965c).
A period of posts pawning refractoriness that marks the end of reproductive activity and prevents the immediate recurrence of gonadal recrudescence has been demonstrated in the stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus (Baggerman, 1972), the cyprinid fish, Notropis bifrenatus (Harrington, 1957), the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj and Vasal, 1976), and the medaka, Oryzias latipes (Egami and Hosokowa, 1973). The refractoriness is overcome in some species by exposure to low temperatures and/or decreasing photoperiods (Sundararaj and Sehgal, 1970c; de Vlaming, 1974; Peter and Crim, 1979). In the cyprinid fish, Couesius plumbeus, the early stages of spermatogenesis are favoured by low temperatures (Ahsan, 1966a), while in the golden shiner (de Vlaming, 1975b) and the goldfish (Gillet, Breton and Billard, 1978), lower temperatures favour early stages of oogenesis and warm temperatures inhibit oogenesis in the goldfish (Gillet, Breton and Billard, 1978) and the sunfish,
Lepomis cyanellus (Kaya, 1973).
A few marine and estuarine temperate-zone fishes have been studied. In the viviparous seaperch, Cymatogaster aggregata, males and females respond to different environmental cues (Wiebe, 1968).Warm temperatures and short photoperiods of late summer accelerate ovarian recrudescence, while final oocyte maturation occurs under cold temperatures. In males, cold temperatures favour spermatogonia formation, while warm temperatures and long photo-period stimulate later stages of spermatogenesis. Although copulation occurs in the summer months, fertilization of the mature oocytes takes place only later, by spermatozoa stored during the intervening period. In the marsh killifish, Fundulus grandis, the early stages of gametogenesis are dependent on cold temperatures, while rapid gonadal recrudescence is stimulated by warm temperatures (de Vlaming, 1972a). In the winter-spawning estuarine gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis, temperature is the primary environmental cue; cool temperatures
stimulate gonadal recrudescence, whereas warm temperatures induce gonadal regression (de Vlaming, 1972b). In the dab, Limanda limanda, exposure to accelerated photoperiod at 11°C in six months similar in pattern to a normal year's cycle resulted in the formation of ripe eggs 2-3 months ahead of the season, while in turbot, Scophthalmus maximus and Solea solea, long photoperiod (LD 18:6 or 20:4) induced formation of ripe eggs (Htun-Han, 1977). In the rabbit fish, Siganus caniculatus, long photoperiod (LD 18:6 at 29°C) retards gonadal development in both sexes, while short photoperiod (LD 12:12) does not (Lam and Soh, 1975).
2.3 Photoperiod-thermoperiod relationship
In teleost fishes which are ectotherms, the principal mode of thermoregulation is behavioural, involving exploitation of thermal heterogeneity in the environment by swimming into desired areas and remaining there. Behavioural thermoregulation has been demonstrated in over 100 species of teleost fishes of which only a few are cultivated (see Coutant, 1977).
The assumption that thermal control of metabolism and reproduction in ectothermic vertebrates is merely concerned with providing optimal temperatures for enzyme activities and receptor-hormone complexes is no longer valid in view of the new evidence in some fishes. Recently, a photoperiod-thermoperiod relationship on body and testicular weight gain in goldfish subjected to increased temperatures at one of six different times in a 24-h period has been demonstrated (Spieler et al., 1977). Depending upon the time of day when the thermo-cycle is commenced, body and testicular weight gain can be stimulated or inhibited. This interesting observation is similar to the presence of a daily rhythm in photoresponsiveness with sensitive phases occurring between 12-18 h, after onset of photoperiod in the case of Gasterosteus aculeatus (Baggerman, 1972) and between 16-17 h and 20-21 h after the onset of photoperiod in Heteropneustes fossilis (Vasal and Sundararaj, 1975).
In the marsh killifish, Fundulus grandis, where both prolactin and cortisol levels show circadian rhythmic variations, warm temperature (28°C) produces a 16-h relation between the hormone rhythms (prolactin peak occurs 16 h after the cortisol peak) and cool temperature (20°C) produces 0-h relation between rhythms (Meier et al., 1978). Further, injections of cortisol and prolactin in the 0-h and 16-h relations establishes winter and summer conditions, respectively. The winter conditions stimulate gonadal growth and preference to saline waters.
The physiological basis and ecological implications of this chronobiological approach is of considerable importance to aquaculture and may hold the key to producing precociously gravid fish. Such studies should be validated and extended to other fresh water and brackish water species of cultivated fishes. Timed application of warmth into fish ponds or even into recirculating systems can optimize growth and reproduction.
The above review indicates that gonadal recrudescence is chiefly regulated by seasonal variations in photoperiod and temperature, while spawning is controlled by temperature and/or rainfall. The environmental information is converted to neural inputs by the sensory receptors and this neural information is transduced into a hormonal output via hypothalamic releasing hormones and finally the pituitary which releases the gonadotropic hormone(s). This leads on to the study of the endocrinology of reproduction in fishes viz., the hypo-thalamus, the pituitary and the gonad.
<section>4</section>
3. THE HYPOTHALAMUS
3.1 Morphology
3.2 Hypothalamic regulation of gonadotropic function
3.3 Gonadotropin-releasing factors
3.4 Effects of Mammalian Gonadotropin-releasing Hormone in Fishes
3.1 Morphology
The regulatory influence of the hypothalamus on the reproductive functions of the pituitary has been established by demonstrating that transplantation of the pituitary from its normal location to other areas or placing electrolytic lesions in certain regions of the hypothalamus results in regression of gonadotropic cells in the pituitary and atrophy of the gonads (Ball and Baker, 1969; Dodd, Follett and Sharp, 1971; Ball et al., 1972; Peter, 1973; Peter and Crim, 1978, 1979; Peter and Fryer, 1979). In a few species, investigations have been conducted to determine the location of the hypophysiotropic centres in the hypothalamus and their functional relationship with the pituitary, as well as the chemical nature of the neurosecretory materials (see Goos, 1978; Crim, Dickhoff and Gorbman, 1978).
The hypothalamus of teleost fishes comprises the Gomori-positive nucleus preopticus (NPO) and the Gomori-negative nucleus lateralis tuberis (NLT) (Follénius, 1965; Ball and Baker, 1969; Perks, 1969; Sage and Bern, 1971; Peter, 1973; Holmes and Ball, 1974), The NPO, which is composed of the pars magnocellularis and the pars parvocellularis, is situated on both sides of the preoptic recess. The axons (Type A peptidergic fibres containing 100-200 nm granules) originating from the cells of the NPO form the preopticohypophysial tract which penetrates the pituitary, ramifies and terminates in the neurointermediate lobe (Bargmann, 1966; Knowles and Vollrath, 1966c, d). The NLT is located in the more caudal part of the hypothalamus and is subdivided into the pars rostralis, pars medialis, pars ventrolateralis and pars lateralis; the presence or absence of these NLT subdivisions varies in different teleost species (see Terlou and Ekengren, 1979). The pars medialis and pars lateralis
have been described in the hypothalamus of Mugil cephalus and Mugil capito (Stahl, 1957; Blanc-Livni and Abraham, 1970), whereas in the rainbow trout all the four parts of the NLT have been described (Follénius, 1963; Terlou and Ekengren, 1979). Follénius and Dubois (1977) using anti-a -endorphin have demonstrated immunocytochemically a positive reaction in a number of pars lateralis cells of NLT in Cyprinus carpio. The axons (Type B aminergic fibres containing 90-100 nm granules) from the NLT nuclei terminate at the adenoneurohypophysial interface (Falck et al., 1962). Ultrastructural studies of the NLT cells have shown similarities between the size of dense core vesicles in them and nerve terminals in the pituitary, thereby supporting the concept of NLT-pituitary relationship (Zambrano, 1972). This concept has been supported by Bern, Nishioka and Nagahama (1974), who have traced the NLT axons by cobalt chloride iontophoresis back to the sectioned pituitary stalk in
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambicus. The NLT may be regulated by other brain centres. Ekengren and Terlou ("1978) and Terlou, de Jong and van Oordt (1978) have shown that NLT cells in the rainbow trout are innervated by monoaminergic fibres.
All parts of the neurohypophysis have rich innervation from the NPO and possibly aminergic fibres coming from the paraventricular organ (PVO). The NPO receives aminergic fibres from the PVO, and the NLT has a high input of NPO and aminergic fibres from PVO. These contacts among the three hypothalamic nuclei such as the NPO, the NLT and the PVO as well as those with the pituitary suggest interesting interactions (Ekengren and Terlou, 1978). A stereotaxic atlas of hypothalamic nuclei is available for the goldfish (Peter and Gill, 1975) and the killifish, Fundulus heteroclitus (Peter, Macey and Gill, 1975).
In teleost fishes there is no real homologue of the tetrapod hypothalamo-hypophysial portal system (Peter, 1973; Dodd, 1975). But Sathyanesan (1970, 1971, 1972) has reported the presence of an incipient portal circulation in catfishes, Clarias batrachus and Heteropneustes fossilis, contrary to the observations of Sundararaj and Viswanathan (1971) on the latter species.
3.2 Hypothalamic regulation of gonadotropic function
The hypothalamic regulation of the activity of the gonadotropic cells in the pituitary has been studied in a number of fishes. The NLT fibres invade the rostral and proximal pars distalis and either innervate the gonadotropic cells or discharge the secretions into peri-vascular spaces surrounding these cells (Knowles and Vollrath, 1966a, b; Vollrath, 1967; Leatherland, 1970a, b; Zambrano, 1970a, b; van Oordt and Ekengren, 1978; Peter and Fryer, 1979). Haider and Sathyanesan (1972a, b) have suggested that in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, the NLT secretory products may also be released into blood vessels passing the perikarya. In many teleost fishes such as the gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis (Zambrano, 1970a, b), the goldfish, Carassius auratus (Kaul and Vollrath, 1974), the black molly, Poecilia latipinna (Peute et al., 1976) the gonadotrophs are directly innervated by fibres similar to those of the NLT, whereas in primitive teleost fishes such as the salmonids,
the gonadotropic cells are not directly innervated (Friedberg and Ekengren, 1977). The NLT fibres may exert a stimulatory influence on gonadotropic cells (Zambrano, 1970a, b; 1971; Knowles and Vollrath, 1966c, d; Peter and Crim, 1979).
Secretory activity in the NLT has been correlated with reproduction in a number of teleost fishes (see de Vlaming, 1974; Viswanathan and Sundararaj, 1974a). However, Peter (1970, 1973) provided a direct evidence for the involvement of the NLT in gonadal activity by demonstrating that lesions in certain parts of the NLT result in loss of gonadal activity.
In a number of species including goldfish and black molly the gonadotrophs are also directly innervated by fibres originating in the NPO. This implicates both the NPO and the NLT in the regulation of gonadotropic functions of the pituitary (Peter and Fryer, 1979). Terlou, de Jong and van Oordt (1978) using scanning cytophotometry, have correlated the activity of the NPO with the annual gonadal cycle in the rainbow trout; the NPO is active during the vitellogenic and the spawning periods (June to January) and inactive in the sexually quiescent period (February to June). Similarly, seasonal fluctuations in the quantity of neurosecretory material in the NPO have been correlated with the gonadal activity in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Viswanathan and Sundararaj, 1974a).
The NPO shows changes after gonadectomy or after administration of steroids in Clarias batrachus (Dixit, 1970; Rao and Betole, 1973) and in Heteropneustes fossilis (Viswanathan and Sundararaj, 1974a, b). Rao, Subhedar and Ganesh (1979) have recently reported seven different subdivisions of the NPO in the catfish, Clarias batrachus. Of these only the medial, lateral and posterolateral subdivisions of NPO paraventricularis show stimulatory changes associated with hypertrophy of gonadotropic cells in the pituitary following ovariectomy and these changes are reversed by estradiol treatment.
Recent work conducted on the goldfish indicates that in the sexually mature gravid female there is a tonic inhibition of gonadotropin (GtH) secretion which must be abolished to allow the ovulatory surge of GtH (see Peter et al., 1978; Stacey, Cook and Peter, 1979). Since lesions in the NLT block gonadal recrudescence and inasmuch as similar lesions cause ovulatory surge in the mature goldfish, the NLT may be the source of gonadotropin-releasing as well as gonadotropin-inhibiting factors (Peter and Crim, 1979). Prostaglandins F[2a ]and F[2] have been reported to be a part of the inhibitory mechanism (Peter and Billard, 1976). Further work would be necessary to clarify the role of the NPO vis-à-vis that of the NLT in regulation of gonadotropic functions in teleost fishes.
3.3 Gonadotropin-releasing factors
Attempts have been made to demonstrate the presence of gonadotropin-releasing factor (GRF) in the brain of teleost fishes by immunofluorescent techniques (see Goos, 1978; Jackson, 1978; Crim, Dickhoff and Gorbman, 1978). Goos and Murathanoglu (1977) have localized GRF in the area dorsalis pars medialis of the telencephalon of rainbow trout, Crim and Evans (1980) have reported that GRF may also be found in an extrahypothalamic site in the winter flounder. Dubois, Billard and Breton (1.978) have recently reported that the mammalian luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone. (LH-RH) immunoreactive fibres terminate only in the meso-adenohypophysis of the rainbow trout, while Goos and van Oordt (1978) have shown numerous immunoreactive LH-RH positive fibres in the lateral walls of the diencephalon that end in the pituitary stalk.
GRF activity has been demonstrated in crude hypothalamic extracts from the common carp (Breton et al., 1971a, 1972a; Breton and Well, 1973; Well, Breton and Reinaud, 1975), the golden shiner (de Vlaming and Vodicnik, 1975), the goldfish (Crim, Peter and Billard, 1976), as well as the plaice, the winter flounder, the Atlantic parr salmon and the rainbow trout (Crim and Evans, 1980) by the ability of these extracts to promote release of gonadotropins when injected into intact recipients. However, the. time of autopsy and condition of the donor and recipient fishes are not always clearly indicated and evaluation is made difficult by the lack of control fish treated with the brain extract. Crim and Evans (1980) have recently developed an in vitro assay for detection of teleost GRF. Breton, Jalabert and Well (1975) have partially characterized the GRF from hypothalamic extracts of the common carp which has a molecular weight of less than 5 000. It is not identical with the
mammalian LH-RH and does not cross react with antimammalian-LH-RH (Breton and Well, 1973; Deery, 1974).
3.4 Effects of Mammalian Gonadotropin-releasing Hormone in Fishes
The mammalian LH-RH is biologically active in several teleost fishes (Crim, Dickhoff and Gorbman, 1978). Mammalian synthetic LH-RH or its analogues in large doses bring about release of gonadotropin in the common carp, Cyprinus carpio (Breton, Well and Jalabert, 1972; Breton and Well, 1973; Fish Reproductive Physiology Research Group and Peptide Hormone Group, 1.978), the brown trout, Salmo trutta (Breton and Well, 1973; Crim and Cluet, 1974), and the goldfish, Carassius auratus (Crim, Peter and Billard, 1976). Peter (1980) has reported that the superactive analogue of LH-RH brings about a longer duration of gonadotropin release response in the goldfish than LH-RH itself. Multiple injections of LH-RH over several, days induce ovulation in the ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis (Hirose and Ishida, 1974), the goldfish (Lam et al., 1978), the common carp (Sokolowska, Popek and Bieniarz, 1978), and plaice and goby (Aida et al., 1978). This effect of LH-RH on the pituitary-gonadal
system is of great potential importance in aquaculture for spawning cultivated fishes. Chinese carps, Aristichthys nobilis, Ctenopharyngodon idella, Megalobrama amblyocephala and Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, have been induced to spawn by injecting synthetic LH-RH or its nonapeptide analogue (Arimura et al., 1974) D-Ala^6, des-Gly^10-LH-RH ethylamide (Cooperative Team for Hormonal Application in Pisciculture, 1977; Fukien-Kiangsu-Chekiang-Shanghai Cooperative Group for Artificial Reproduction of Fresh-water Economic Fishes, 1977). However, the LH-RH and its analogue have been administered along with pituitary extracts and this makes evaluation of the contribution of LH-RH or its analogue very difficult. However, an unexpected benefit was an overall drop in mortality in breeders. Donaldson, Hunter and Dye (1978) have found the nonapeptide to be more potent than LH-RH in inducing final oocyte maturation and ovulation in the coho salmon, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha. Another
superactive analogue of LH-RH [D-Ser(Bu^t)^6] LH-RH ethylamide (Hoechst, 766) was even more potent in inducing ovulation in the coho salmon when preceded by a priming dose of partially-purified salmon gonadotropin (Donaldson, Hunter and Dye, 1979).
Pituitary response to mammalian LH-RH has been studied in male and female rainbow trout at different stages of gametogenesis. The male is barely sensitive at the beginning of spermatogenesis, but a response occurs at the spermatid stage and continues during the rest of spermatogenesis and spermiation. The response to LH-RH is low in immature females and in those in early stages of maturation and becomes stronger at vitelline maturation (Well et al., 1978).
The above discussion shows conclusively that the hypothalamus regulates the reproductive functions of the pituitary gland, the structure and physiology of which is discussed in the next section.
<section>5</section>
4. THE PITUITARY GLAND
4.1 Morphology
4.2 Identification of gonadotrophs
4.3 Immunocytological identification of gonadotrophs
4.4 Pituitary and plasma gonadotropin levels
4.1 Morphology
The general organization and morphology of the pituitary gland or hypophysis has been described in a number of teleost fishes including a few cultivated species (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Ball and Baker, 1969; Sage. and Bern, 1971; Rao, 1972; Holmes and Ball, 1974; de Vlaming, 1974; Baker, Keshavanath and Sundararaj, 1974; Fontaine and Olivereau, 1975; Moitra and Sarkar, 1976a; Jose and Sathyanesan, 1977).
The pituitary gland in fishes, as in all other vertebrates, is composed of the adeno-hypophysis derived from the Rathke's pouch and the neurohypophysis originating from the diencephalon. The adenohypophysis, which regulates gonadal functions in fishes, is the site of synthesis, storage and release into circulation of several peptide and protein hormones. The adenohypophysis is divided into the rostral (pro-adenohypophysis) and the proximal (meso-adenohypophysis) pars distalis, and the pars intermedia (meta-adenohypophysis) (Ball and Baker, 1969; Schreibman, Leatherland and McKeown, 1973).
4.2 Identification of gonadotrophs
Heretofore, cell types in the fish pituitary have been identified by histochemical techniques and validated by histophysiological experiments (see Ball and Baker, 1969; Nagahama, 1973; Fontaine and Olivereau, 1975). The gonadotropin, secreting cells - the gonadotrophs - are most often located in the proximal pars distalis and are identified on the basis of topographical location and tinctorial reactions with the periodic acid - Schiff reagent and Herlant'a tetrachrome stain.
Correlations between changes in the number and granulation of the basophils (gonadotrophs) and events in the reproductive cycle have been studied only in a few cultivated species such as the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj, 1959, 1960), the common carp, Cyprinus carpio (Leray, 1965; Blanc-Livni and Abraham, 1968), the catfish, Clarias batrachus (Lehri, 1966, 1970), the grey mullet, Mugil cephalus (Blanc-Livni and Abraham, 1968) and mrigal, Cirrhina mrigala (Moitra and Sarkar, 1976b). The basophils are more numerous and heavily granulated during the breeding season than during the sexually quiescent phase.
4.3 Immunocytological identification of gonadotrophs
Doerr-Schott (1976) and Follénius, Doerr-Schott and Dubois (1978) have reviewed the literature on the immunocytology of pituitary cells of teleost fishes. The detection of piscine protein hormones by immunological methods depends upon the availability of purified fish pituitary hormones and the corresponding antisera, which should work on histological sections. Burzawa-Gérard (1971) reported that an extract of carp pituitary powder does not react in the chicken luteinizing hormone (LH) assay system, while purified carp gonadotropin (GtH) reacts only at very high dose levels. Further, antisera against carp GtH show only limited affinity for ovine LH in competitive radioimnunoassay (Breton et al., 1971b). However, cross-reactivity of the piscine GtH with the antibodies to corresponding mammalian hormone Is not a reliable criterion for the detection of the hormone nor is it sufficient proof that substances so detected correspond to the biologically active hormone (see Nicoll,
1975 for discussion).
Investigators using light and electron microscopic as well as immunocytochemical techniques have identified either one or two types of gonadotropic cells (Follénius, Doerr-Schott and Dubois, 1978). Billard, Breton and Dubois (1971) demonstrated in the pituitary of the common carp, Cyprinus carpio, gonadotrophs using antisera to carp GtH and ovine LH, and thyrotrophs by using carp thyrotropin antiserum absorbed by carp gonadotropin. Similarly, McKeown and van Overbeeke (1971) have reported a positive immunoreaction with ovine LH anti-serum but not with FSH antiserum in most of the basophils situated in the rostral and proximal pars distalis in the sockeye salmon. Immunocytological and immunohistochemical studies indicate the presence of one LH-like gonadotropic factor in the piscine pituitary (Follénius, Doerr-Schott and Dubois, 1978). One gonadotropic cell type has been reported in the pituitary glands of Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj, 1959, 1960; Baker, Keshavanath
and Sundararaj, 1974), Clarias batrachus (Dixit, 1970), Trachurus sp. and Gasterosteus aculeatus (Leatherland, 1970a), Anoptichthys jordani (Mattheij, 1970), Oncorhynchus keta (Nagahama and Yamamoto, 1970), Cyprinus carpio (Billard, Breton and Dubois, 1971), Oncorhynchus nerka (McKeown and Leatherland, 1973), Carassius auratus (Kaul and Vollrath, 1974), Poecilia latipinna (Batten, Ball and Benjamin, 1975; Peute et al., 1978), Salmo salar (Ekengren, Peute and Fridberg, 1978), and Rhamdia hilarii (Val-Sella and Sesso, 1980), whereas two types of gonadotropic cells have been shown in Anguilla anguilla (Olivereau and Herlant, 1960; Knowles and Vollrath, 1966a, b), Mugil cephalus (Leray and Carlon, 1963; Stahl, 1963; Leray, 1966; Olivereau, 1968), Oncorhynchus nerka (Cook and van Overbeeke, 1972), Leuciscus rutilus (Båge et al., 1974), Monopterus albus (O and Chan, 1974), and Oncorhynchus masou (Ueda and Hiroshima, 1979). Recently, Olivereau (1978) has examined the pituitary
glands of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, at several stages of sexual maturation in winter and reported two types of gonadotropic cells; one which predominates in mature trout has large granules and is labelled with antisera to human chorionic gonadotropin and bovine thyrotropin, and the other type has fine granules and reacts poorly with glycoprotein staining and predominates in females with immature ovaries. Peute et al. (1978), who have correlated the gonadotropic content of the pituitary with ultrastructural changes in the gonadotropic cells in the rainbow trout at various stages of its reproductive cycle, reported a drop in hormone content concomitant with the onset of exogenous vitellogenesis in June/July in the female and with the acceleration of spermatogenesis in September in the male.
van Oordt and Ekengren (1978) have applied the double antibody immunofluorescent technique for the identification of functional cell types in the adenohypophysis of rainbow trout. The globular or cisternal forms of basophils related to different physiological states of the gonadotropic cell have been correlated with the gonadal cycle.
Now that Ng and Idler (1978a, b; 1979) and Idler and Ng (1979) have isolated two types of gonadotropins from the pituitary glands of carp, salmon, winter flounder and plaice, antibodies to the two gonadotropins could be used in the immunofluorescent or immunoenzyme studies to identify the gonadotropic cells that are active during vitellogenesis and ovulation.
4.4 Pituitary and plasma gonadotropin levels
With the availability of the radioimmunoassay techniques for measurements of plasma levels of gonadotropic hormones, a number of studies (Billard et al., 1978; Peute et al., 1978; van Oordt and Ekengren, 1978) on seasonal variations in gonadotropin levels in the pituitary and plasma have been made in common Carp and rainbow trout (see section 2 on Reproductive cycles and environmental cues and section 5 on Gonadotropic hormones).
O'Connor (1972) has proposed a circadian pattern of pituitary gonadotropin release in the rainbow trout, where the pituitary gonadotropic content, assayed by using ^32P uptake in chick testes, decreases significantly shortly after the onset Of the light period (LD 10:14) and the levels remain high during the rest of the 24-h period. Decrease of GtH in the pituitary could mean that the hormone is being released at a faster rate than its synthesis or it could imply a blockade of both synthesis as well as release. Recently, Peter and Hontela (1978) and Hontela and Peter (1978) have reported circadian rhythmic changes in gonadotropin levels in plasma of goldfish.
The pituitary gland produces two gonadotropic hormones according to recent work on a few species. The isolation and secretory patterns of gonadotropin(s) are discussed in the next section.
<section>6</section>
5. GONADOTROPIC HORMONES
5.1 Isolation
5.2 Chemistry and immunological properties
5.3 One versus two gonadotropins
5.4 Plasma gonadotropin profiles
5.1 Isolation
Gonadotropic hormones (GtH) have been isolated in varying degrees of purity from the pituitary glands of several teleost fishes including some cultivated species such as common carp, Cyprinus carpio (Burzawa-Gérard, 1971, 1974; Idler and Ng, 1979), the chinook salmon, Oncorhynchus tshawytscha (Donaldson et al., 1972b; Pierce, Faith and Donaldson, 1976), cat-fish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj and Samy, 1974), sturgeon, Acipenser stellatus (Burzawa-Gérard, Goncharov and Fontaine, 1975a, b), chum salmon, Oncorhynchus keta (Idler, Hwang and Bazar, 1975; Idler, Bazar and Hwang, 1975a, b; Yoneda and Yamazaki, 1976; Yoneda, Yamazaki and Ishihara, 1977; Ng and Idler, 1978b; Idler and Hwang, 1978; Idler and Ng, 1979), rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri (Breton, Jalabert and Reinaud, 1976), tilapia, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambicus (Farmer and Papkoff, 1977), American plaice, Hippoglossoides platessoides (Ng and Idler, 1978a, 1979), winter flounder, Pseudopleuronectes americanus
(Ng and Idler, 1978a, 1979) and another tilapia, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) spirulus (Hyder, Shah and Hartree, 1979). In addition, the pituitary extracts of grass carp, Ctenopharyngodon idella, bighead carp, Aristichthys nobilis and catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, have been subjected to gel chromatography on Sephadex-G100 and three, protein fractions have been obtained; of these, the second fraction has gonadotropic activity (Sinha, 1969, 1971; Sundararaj, Anand and Sinha, 1972; Nath and Sundararaj, 1977). Hattingh and du Toit (1973) and Haider and Blüm (1977) using pituitary material from mudfish, Labeo umbratus and goldfish, respectively, have separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis two fractions having gonadotropic activities.
5.2 Chemistry and immunological properties
The piscine gonadotropins are glycoprotein in nature (Fontaine and Burzawa-Gérard, 1978; Idler and Ng, 1979; Fontaine, 1980). The amino acid composition of gonadotropins from carp (Burzawa-Gérard, 1974; Idler and Ng, 1979), sturgeon (Burzawa-Gérard, Goncharov and Fontaine, 1975b), plaice (Ng and Idler, 1979), rainbow trout (Breton, Jalabert and Reinaud, 1976), and tilapia (Farmer and Papkoff, 1977), shows a broad similarity to the mammalian luteinizing hormone. The gonadotropins from carp, sturgeon and trout are each composed of two subunits, the alpha and beta chains; the amino acid and carbohydrate compositions, the long N-terminal sequences and the C-terminal amino acids of the two subunits of carp GtH have been determined (Jolles et al., 1977). A significant degree of homology between the two subunits of carp GtH with those of mammalian follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) has been demonstrated and further, the beta subunit of carp GtH is more
closely related to the beta subunit of LH than to that of FSH (Fontaine and Burzawa-Gérard, 1978; Fontaine, 1980).
Tan and Dodd (1978) have studied the immunological relatedness of gonadotropins of 35 species of teleost fishes by using a salmon-salmon homologous radioimmunoassay and a salmon-carp heterologous radioimmunoassay. In homologous radioimmunoassay, most salmon species tested except powan and ayu cross react in a manner identical with that of the standard hormone, while the nonsalmonid species showed no cross reaction. In the heterologous radioimmunoassay, all cyprinids and salmonids except ayu gave inhibition curves parallel to standard carp gonadotropin. Thus, immunological properties of fish gonadotropins do not correspond to known phylogenetic relations of fishes. A study of immunological properties of pituitary GtH and its subunits from fishes to mammals gives additional evidence of homology among piscine and mammalian pituitary glycoproteins indicating evolutionary similarity between subunits of the same type (Fontaine and Burzawa-Gérard, 1978; Burzawa-Gérard, Dufour and
Fontaine, 1980). Burzawa-Gérard and Fontaine (1976) have produced a hybrid molecule containing the alpha subunit from bovine GtH and beta subunit from carp which is much more potent in the amphibian spermiation test; interestingly, the reverse hybrid molecule has no effect in either mammal or carp.
5.3 One versus two gonadotropins
The number of gonadotropins present in the pituitary glands of fishes has often been discussed, debated and is still controversial. Earlier studies favoured the one hormone hypothesis (Burzawa-Gérard, 1971, 1974; Donaldson et al., 1972b; Fontaine, 1975, 1980), since the single gonadotropin isolated from salmon and carp pituitaries could induce complete gametogenesis including oocyte maturation and spermiation in the hypophysectomized recipients (Donaldson, 1973; Billard, Burzawa-Gérard and Breton, 1970; Sundararaj et al., 1976). In 1975 Idler and associates (Idler, Bazar and Hwang, 1975a, b) using affinity chromatography have reported evidence of more than one sex-specific gonadotropin in chum salmon pituitary glands. Breton, Prunet and Reinaud (1978) have confirmed the above observation in chinook salmon, where gonadotropin isolated from the male glands is more effective on the testis than on the ovary, while the reverse is true for the female-specific gonadotropin.
Sundararaj and Samy (1974) have adopted purification procedures used for isolating mammalian gonadotropin where ammonium sulphate at 50 percent saturation is known to precipitate the mammalian LH, while full saturation is required for precipitation of FSH (Papkoff et al., 1965; Papkoff, Gospodarowicz and Li, 1967) to catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, pituitary material. An LH-like preparation with the. capacity to induce maturation and ovulation in catfish has been obtained; a precipitate obtained after full saturation is not active in catfish ovulation assay. It was, however, not tested for vitellogenic activity in catfish. Farmer and Papkoff (1977) have prepared a gonadotropin from the pituitary glands of tilapia, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambicus by following the purification procedures used for isolation of mammalian gonadotropins. They have reported an LH-like gonadotropin which stimulates in vitro testosterone production in rat Leydig cells; the biological activity of
another preparation, which fractionates identically to mammalian and nonmammalian FSH, is not reported. Their work indicates that if fish pituitary produces two gonadotropins corresponding to FSH and LH of mammals, the material isolated represents teleost LH. Hyder, Shah and Hartree (1979) isolated from Sarotherodon (Tilapia) spirulus pituitary glands a potent gonadotropic fraction capable of inducing both spermatogenesis and Leydig cell activity which by analogy with mammals would contain the FSH fraction; the other fraction was not equally potent.
The glycoprotein nature of piscine gonadotropin has been used by Idler and associates to retain it on concanavalin A-Sepharose in some of the recent purification procedures (see Campbell and Idler, 1976, 1977; Ng and Idler, 1978a, b, 1979; Idler and Ng, 1979). Recently, Ng and Idler (1979) and Idler and Ng (1979) have isolated from the pituitary glands of common carp, chum salmon, American plaice and the winter flounder two gonadotropins, the vitellogenic and the maturational hormones. The fraction low in carbohydrate content, lacking the affinity to concanavalin A-Sepharose, produces yolk incorporation into the ovary of winter flounder and trout oocytes in vitro, whereas the carbohydrate rich fraction, which is absorbed on concanavalin A-Sepharose induces maturation arid ovulation. Further, the carbohydrate rich fraction also has vitellogenic activity in the female flounder (Idler and Ng, 1979). The vitellogenic hormone is distinguishable from the maturational hormone in.
the composition of its protein and carbohydrate moieties. Antisera to the two gonadotropic fractions from the chum salmon pituitaries capable of blocking gonadotropic actions in vivo have been prepared (Ng, Campbell and Idler, 1980). The question now is to determine whether or not the male also produces two gonadotropins like the female.
5.4 Plasma gonadotropin profiles
The plasma gonadotropin profiles have been determined in rainbow trout, brook trout, common carp, Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar, and sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka, by using specific radioimmunoassays (see also section 2 on Reproductive cycles and environmental cues). In salmonids generally GtH is secreted in gradually increasing amounts to stimulate gonadal recrudescence and a sharp increase in GtH levels occurs at the time of spermiation or ovulation (Billard, Richard and Breton, 1977; Fostier et al., 1978). Elevated levels of plasma GtH at the time of spermiation and ovulation are also reported in other species (Peter and Crim, 1979).
The responsiveness of the gonad to GtH varies with the time of the day (de Vlaming and Vodicnik, 1977; Cook and Peter, 1980) and this may have some relation with the daily fluctuations in the plasma levels of GtH. Circadian rhythmic variations in plasma levels of GtH have been reported in goldfish (Breton et al., 1972b; Peter and Hontela, 1978; Hontela and Peter, 1978). The circadian rhythms in GtH levels are nearly absent or amplitudes smaller in sexually regressed female goldfish than in recrudescing and gravid goldfish. The circadian rhythms in GtH levels appear to be important in stimulating gonadal activity. Exposure of goldfish to stimulatory conditions of long photoperiod and warm temperature elevates plasma GtH levels (Gillett, Billard and Breton, 1977; Gillet, Breton and Billard, 1978) and also causes large circadian fluctuations (Hontela and Peter, 1978). The uptake of injected GtH from the site of injection to the circulatory system in goldfish is higher at 20°C
than at 12°C. Further, warmer temperatures are associated with an increase in the metabolic clearance rate of the injected GtH in goldfish (see Cook and Peter, 1980). Thus, the above findings imply that the poor success in the hypophysation of major Indian and Chinese carps (see Chaudhuri, 1976) may be in part due to warm ambient temperatures.
The morphology and physiology of the gonads, the ovary and the testis, the target organs of gonadotropic hormone(s), as well as regulation of their function by gonadotropins are discussed in the next five sections.
<section>7</section>
6. THE OVARY
6.1 Morphology
6.2 Cellular source of steroid hormones
6.3 C[18] estrogenic steroids
6.4 C[19] and C[21] steroids
6.5 Sex recognition and pheromones
6.6 Post-ovulatory follicle
6.1 Morphology
The ovary in most teleost fishes is a hollow sac-like organ into which extend numerous ovigerous folds lined by germinal epithelium. The germ cells, the endodermally derived oogonia, multiply mitotically and get transformed into nonyolky primary oocytes whose, nuclei are arrested at the prophase of the first meiotic division until maturation. These processes can take place even in the absence of the pituitary (Barr, 1968; Hoar, 1969). Primary oocytes, covered generally by two layers of follicle cells, an outer thecal layer and an inner granulosa layer, undergo vitellogenesis when yolk is deposited in the. ooplasm. During maturation, the first polar body is given cut and the second meiotic division is arrested at metaphase. The eggs are spawned by the fish at this stage and the second polar body is released only after fertilization. In some fishes, ovulation and- spawning occur almost at the same time, whereas in ethers (rainbow trout and milkfish) ovulated oocytes are
retained in the ovarian or peritoneal cavity and spawning takes place much, later.
6.2 Cellular source of steroid hormones
Application of improved histochemical techniques and electron microscopy has shown promise of localizing the cellular sources of steroid hormone's in fish ovary (Lofts and Bern, 1972; Guraya, 1976a, 1979; Hoar and Nagahama, 1978). Cells involved in steroidogenesis have smooth endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria have tubular cristae (Christensen, 1975). They also contain the key enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of steroids such as hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (3ß-HSD), required in the oxidation of steroids and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase responsible for the NADPH-mediated hydroxylation of steroids. 3ß-HSD in the special thecal and granulosa cells has been shown in a number of teleost fishes (see de Vlaming, 1974; Lance and Callard, 1978). Ovarian steroidogenesis has been attributed to the granulosa cells in Cyprinus carpio; Mugil capito and Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea (Blanc-Livni, 1971) and in Sarotherodon (Tilapia) nilotica (Yaron, 1971). In rainbow trout,
Salmo gairdneri, the granulosa and interstitial cells of the ovary are involved in estradiol production (Lambert et al., 1978; van den Hurk and Peute, 1979). According to Hoar and Nagahama (1978) ovarian hormones are mostly synthesized by the special thecal cells which are homologous to the Leydig cells in males. Ovarian, homogenates from rainbow trout when incubated with tritiated pregnenolone or androstenedione during different, stages of the ovarian cycle show that the latter is used as substrate for conversion to estrone and estradiol during endogenous previtellogenesis, whereas the former is used during exogenous vitellogenesis (Lambert and van Bohemen, 1979).
6.3 C[18] estrogenic steroids
That the teleost ovary is capable of producing C[18] estrogenic steroids has been determined by experiments involving bilateral ovariectomy and replacement therapy experiments (Dodd, 1960; de Vlaming, 1974; Lance and Callard, 1978) and more directly, by extraction and identification of estrogenic steroids from the ovary (see Bern and Chieffi, 1968 for extensive bibliography; Hoar, 1969; Nandi, 1967; Ozon, 1972b; Reinboth, 1972; Colombo, del Conte and Clemenze, 1972; Sandor, 1979). The estrogens are also responsible for the secondary sexual characters and for sexual behaviour. Several investigators have shown that the teleost ovarian tissue has the capacity to transform labelled precursors into estrogenic steroids such as estradiol-17ß, estrone and estriol (see Ozon, 1972b; de Vlaming, 1974; Lance and Callard, 1978; van Bohemen and Lambert, 1978; Lambert, 1978; Lambert and van Bohemen, 1979; Sandor, 1979). Plasma levels of estrone and/or estradiol have been determined in
channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus (Eleftheriou, Böehlke and Tiemeier, 1966), Salmo gairdneri (Schreck, Lackey and Hopwood, 1973; Lambert et al., 1978; Fostier et al., 1978; Billard et al., 1978) goldfish, Carassius auratus (Schreck and Hopwood, 1974), common carp, Cyprinus carpio (Billard et al., 1978), plaice, Pleuronectes platessa (Wingfield and Grimm, 1977), and Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea (Yaron et al., 1977; Terkatin-Shimony and Yaron, 1978) and catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj, Goswami and Lamba, 1979; Sundararaj, Lamba and Goswami, 1980).
6.4 C[19] and C[21] steroids
The teleost ovary is also known to produce several nonestrogenic steroids (see Sandor, 1979). The ovary of a number of teleost fishes has been shown to produce 11-deoxycorticosterone and 11-deoxycortisol, (Colombo et al., 1973; Colombo and Colombo Belvedere, 1976), epipregnanolone (3a -hydroxy-5ß-pregnan-20-one) and pregnanediol (5ß-pregnan-3a -20a -diol) (Ungar et al., 1977). Progesterone has been identified in the ovaries but its presence in the blood has not so far been reported except in the winter flounder, Pseudopleuronectes americanus (Campbell, Walsh and Idler, 1976). It is also now well established that in teleost fishes, gonadotropins induce oocyte maturation through the synthesis of C[21] steroids, the source of which in many species is the ovary (Jalabert, 1976; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977a) or the interrenal as in catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977b).
Testosterone and 11-oxygenated androgens have been isolated from incubations of C[19] and C[21] steroid precursors with ovaries obtained from teleost fishes belonging to seven orders (see Kime, 1979; Sandor, 1979). It is not clear whether testosterone is produced as an intermediate in estrogen biosynthesis or it represents an ovarian hormone. However, the 11-oxygenated androgens have some physiological significance. In Mugil capito, levels of 11-ketotestosterone are much higher in seawater fish than in freshwater fish and this has been related to infertility of fish in fresh water (Eckstein and Eylath, 1970). Eckstein and Katz (1971) have identified testosterone, 11-ketotestosterone and 11-deoxycorticosterone as the major conversion products of radioactive precursors from ovarian tissues of Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea, and Katz and Eckstein (1974) have identified and isolated the same steroids from the peripheral plasma and reported that levels of 11-ketotestosterone are
higher than those of testosterone in the plasma of spawning Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea. However, in rainbow trout the plasma levels of 11-ketotestosterone are undetectable or low during most of the reproductive cycle (Simpson and Wright, 1977). In female catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, plasma levels of testosterone (see also Truscott et al., 1978) are much lower than those of estradiol-17ß during the vitellogenic period, whereas they exceed those of estradiol-17ß during the maintenance phase (Sundararaj, Goswami and Lamba, 1979; Sundararaj, Lamba and Goswami, 1980).
Reinboth (1972, 1979) has reviewed the work on steroidogenic pathways in ambisexual fishes in which a correlation exists between biological events related to sex inversion and peculiarities in steroid biosynthesis. 11-ketotestosterone which is present in the 12-month old guppy, Poecilia reticulata, is absent in 3-month old fish and it has been suggested that this may be the cause for spontaneous sex reversal sometimes seen in old guppies (Lambert and Pot, 1975). 11-oxygenated androgens may be responsible for the long delay in sexual maturation in eel, Anguilla anguilla (Colombo and Colombo Belvedere, 1976). Ovarian 11ß-hydroxylase has been related to hermaphroditism in protogynous Coris julis and the protandric Pagellus acarne (Reinboth, 1972, 1979). However, the role of ovarian 11-oxygenated androgens in regulation of fertility in teleost fishes is far from clear.
6.5 Sex recognition and pheromones
One of the most fascinating phenomena in the spawning of fishes is that they identify the opposite sex easily as they start their specific spawning behaviour. The information on sex recognition in fishes is meagre and fragmentary (Liley, 1969). In many fishes, visual cues are important but in many others chemoreception has been proposed as a method of sex recognition. A substance present in the ovarian fluid of the gravid female, Bathygobius soporator, can elicit courtship behaviour in the male (Tavolga, 1956), and in Lebistes reticulatus, the male becomes hyperactive when exposed to a substance released by the female which has been identified as an estrogen (Amouriq, 1965). In goldfish, a substance produced by the kidney of estrogen-treated fish or mature female is recognized by the androgen-treated fish or mature male (Yamazaki and Watanabe, 1979). Such sex pheromones might be species specific and they should be chemically analysed since they may be of potential value in
fish culture as well as in basic studies on spawning behaviour of fish.
6.6 Post-ovulatory follicle
The post-ovulatory follicle in the majority of the teleost fishes collapses and merges with the stroma. Unlike in mammals, it does not get organized into a corpus luteum-like structure and has no endocrine functions in most species of fishes studied (see Saidapur, 1978). In some fishes such as the rainbow trout, after ovulation, the granulosa, special thecal and interstitial cells can synthesize steroids that may have a function in the maintenance of ovulated eggs (Guraya, 1976a). Often, many of the developing follicles, or the unovulated yolky oocytes that remain in the follicles, become atretic. The granulosa cell layer in such cases hypertrophies and phagocytoses the yolk; such follicles, termed 'corpora atretica' do not have endocrine functions.
The growth of the follicle and subsequent changes that take place leading to yolk formation and deposition (vitellogenesis) are discussed in the next section.
<section>8</section>
7. HORMONAL REGULATION OF VITELLOGENESIS
7.1 Role of piscine gonadotropins
7.2 Role of mammalian gonadotropins
7.3 Role of estrogenic steroids in synthesis of egg-yolk precursors
7.4 Chemistry of egg-yolk and its precursors
7.1 Role of piscine gonadotropins
In oviparous animals, embryos are dependent on the egg-yolk for their nutritional requirements. The process of yolk deposition in oocytes - vitellogenesis - is a seasonal or cyclic phenomenon. Information on hormonal regulation of vitellogenesis in teleost fishes has been reviewed by Reinboth (1972), Donaldson (1973), de Vlaming (1974), Dodd (1975), Fontaine, Y.A. (1975), Fontaine, M. (1976), van Ree (1977a, b) and Crim and Idler (1978).
All stages of vitellogenesis starting with the mobilization of lipid from storage sites, the synthesis in the liver of a female-specific glycolipophosphoprotein - vitellogenin - and its eventual deposition in oocytes are known to be gonadotropin-dependent (Wallace, 1978; Nath and Sundararaj, 1981a, b). Hypophysectomy results in atresia of yolky oocytes (Dodd, 1960; de Vlaming, 1974), whereas replacement therapy with crude extracts of fish pituitary and purified gonadotropins isolated from carp (Burzawa-Gérard, 1971, 1974; Idler and Ng, 1979), salmon (Yamazaki and Donaldson, 1968b; Sundararaj, Anand and Donaldson, 1972; Donaldson et al., 1972b; Ng and Idler, 1978b; Idler and Ng, 1979) as well as plaice and winter flounder (Campbell and Idler, 1976; Ng and Idler, 1978a, 1979) induce vitellogenesis (Peter and Crim, 1979). Ng and Idler (1978a, b; 1979) and Idler and Ng (1979) have isolated two gonadotropic hormones. The one with low carbohydrate content induces vitellogenesis,
while the other, which is rich in carbohydrates, induces maturation and ovulation. Recently, Idler and Campbell (1980) have suggested that in rainbow trout the salmon gonadotropic fraction rich in glycoprotein which is absorbed on concanavalin A-Sepharose is responsible for stimulation of estradiol secretion, whereas a gonadotropin with a lower carbohydrate content that is not absorbed on concanavalin A-Sepharose is involved in yolk incorporation (Campbell and Idler, 1976; Campbell, 1978; Ng and Idler, 1978a, b). In the ovaries of gonadotropin-treated fishes, the granulosa and thecal layers surrounding the oocytes are hypertrophied and show enhanced D ^5-3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity (de Vlaming, 1974; van Ree, 1977a, b) indicating that gonadotropins induce vitellogenesis through the production of ovarian steroids, possibly estrogens. Information on the production of estrogens in the teleost ovary in response to gonadotropic stimulation has been reviewed in
section 6 on the ovary.
7.2 Role of mammalian gonadotropins
In contrast to piscine gonadotropins, mammalian gonadotropins and estrogens bring about only the induction of vitellogenin synthesis but do not promote its incorporation into developing oocytes in the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, (Sundararaj and Anand, 1972; Anand, Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1975; Nath and Sundararaj, 1981b; Sundararaj and Nath, 1981), even though they maintain yolky oocytes in the hypophysectomized gravid catfish, possibly through production of ovarian estrogen (Anand and Sundararaj, 1974b). Thus, mammalian gonadotropins cannot complete the entire process of vitellogenesis in teleost fishes (see Fontaine, Y.A., 1975; Fontaine, M., 1976; van Ree, 1977a, b). The possible role of other protein hormones in vitellogenesis is controversial (see Upadhyay, Breton and Billard, 1978). Very low doses of thyroxine stimulate vitellogenesis in immature goldfish (Hurlburt, 1977) possibly by increasing ovarian sensitivity to gonadotropin.
7.3 Role of estrogenic steroids in synthesis of egg-yolk precursors
During vitellogenesis elevated litres of serum components, specially lipids, calcium and phosphoproteins have been recorded in fish (see review by Wallace, 1978). A part of yolk is synthesized by various organelles in the oocyte cytoplasm itself and this is termed as endogenous yolk (Raven, 1961; Norrevang, 1968; Upadhyay, Breton and Billard, 1978), whereas the remainder of the yolk is extra-ovarian in origin hence known as exogenous yolk (Norrevang, 1968; Wallace, 1978). The key product in vitellogenesis is a female-specific glycolipophosphoprotein called vitellogenin which is synthesized in the liver in response to circulating estrogens and transported by blood to the ovary where it is taken up by oocytes, cleaved into the final egg-yolk proteins - lipovitellin and phosvitin - and deposited as yolk granules or platelets (Wallace, 1978).
Estrogens stimulate the liver of oviparous vertebrates to produce protein and lipid precursors of yolk (Wallace, 1978). A number of investigators have used immunochemical and/or electrophoretic methods to identify female-specific serum proteins and to show that the major protein constituents of eggs are present in the serum of female fish undergoing vitellogenesis (Wallace, 1978; Hara and Hirai, 1978; Korsgaard and Petersen, 1979; Hara, Yamauchi and Hirai, 1980; Campbell and Idler, 1980). In recent years, Emmersen and Petersen (1976) in flounder, Platichtys flesus, Hara and Hirai (1978) and Campbell and Idler (1980) in rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, Hara, Yamauchi and Hirai (1980) in the Japanese eel. Anguilla japonica, and Nath and Sundararaj (1981a) in catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, have isolated by gel chromatography, female-specific lipophosphoprotein from the blood of vitellogenic female and of estradiol-treated female or male fish. Plasma levels of vitellogenin
have been quantified by radioimmunoassay in the Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar sebago (Idler, Hwang and Crim, 1979) and rainbow trout (Campbell and Idler, 1980).
7.4 Chemistry of egg-yolk and its precursors
Several attempts have been made to determine the biochemical nature of vitellogenin and egg-yolk in fishes (see Wallace, 1978). Analysis of yolky eggs indicates that the egg-yolk is composed of lipovitellin and phosvitin, the former is rich in lipid and poor in phosphorus and the latter is rich in phosphorus and poor in lipid (Wallace, 1978; Campbell and Idler, 1980). The amino acid composition of vitellogenin as well as of lipovitellin and phosvitin has been determined in a number of fishes (Schmidt et al., 1965; Ito et al., 1966; Mano and Yoshida, 1969; Hara and Hirai, 1978; Campbell and Idler, 1980). In the Japanese eel, Anguilla japonica, vitellogenin and the related egg protein have similar molecular weights suggesting that in the eel vitellogenin may be incorporated into egg-yolk as a phosvitin-lipovitellin complex without any structural rearrangement (Hara, Yamauchi and Hirai, 1980).
At the end of vitellogenesis the ovary is packed with yolky oocytes which subsequently undergo maturation and ovulation under favourable environmental conditions.
<section>9</section>
8. HORMONAL REGULATION OF OOCYTE MATURATION AND OVULATION
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Hypophysation
8.3 Existence of a steroidogenic relay in gonadotropin-induced maturation
8.4 Source of maturation-inducing steroids: The ovary versus the interrenal
8.5 Hypotheses
8.6 Mechanism of steroid-induced oocyte maturation
8.7 Ovulation
8.8 Ovulating agents other than gonadotropins and steroids
8.1 Introduction
Maturation is accomplished in the fish oocyte by means of two successive meiotic divisions during the course of which the oocyte gives out two polar bodies. During this process, the enlarged nucleus of the primary oocyte, which is arrested at the dictyotene stage, moves towards a more peripheral position, its membrane breaks down and with the extrusion of a polar body the first meiotic division is completed. The second meiotic division starts immediately thereafter but progresses only up to the metaphase stage (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a, b; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977a, b; Masui and Clarke, 1979). During these events, in some species, a distinct animal pole differentiates from the vegetal pole. The yolk also undergoes some sort of maturation as well as hydration and becomes less opaque (Stevens, 1966; Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a; Jalabert et al., 1973); the oil droplets, when present, coalesce to form one or more larger globules (Stevens, 1966; Fostier, Jalabert and
Terqui, 1973). Soon after, the mature (secondary) oocyte is ovulated out of its follicular envelope and acquires a jelly coat (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977a., b). The ovulated eggs are then spawned in water and almost immediately fertilized by the male.
Environmental conditions required for initiation of oocyte maturation, ovulation and spawning are much more strict than those for gametogenesis. In the majority of fishes, maturational processes are initiated only when thermal conditions are optimum. In others, a precise combination of daylength and temperature is required. In still others, radically different environmental stimuli such as rainfall and inundation precipitate maturational events.
8.2 Hypophysation
8.2.1 Hypophysation by homoplastic and heteroplastic pituitary extracts
8.2.2 Hypophysation by partially purified and purified gonadotropins
8.2.3 Hypophysation by steroids
The precise combination of environmental factors required for maturation, ovulation and spawning when available, brings about an accelerated release of gonadotropin from the pituitary into the blood stream. As a result, gonadotropin, which was hitherto being secreted only at a tonic level for the maintenance of yolky oocytes, suddenly appears as a surge. The elevated titres of gonadotropin bring about maturational changes culminating in the act of spawning. However, quite often, under farm conditions, the requisite environmental factors are either not available or do not persist for sufficient length of time for spontaneous maturation to occur. Thus, one of the greatest constraints to fish culture has been the problem of obtaining fry of commercially important fishes in sufficient numbers and of good quality for stocking culture ponds. The pioneering discovery of Houssay (1931) and von Ihering (1935, 1937) that fishes can be induced to spawn by injecting pituitary
homogenates has somewhat mitigated the problem. The principal advantage of this technique, referred to in aquacultural parlance as hypophysation, is that by simulating the natural gonadotropin surge, it bypasses, to some extent, the environmental variables of photoperiod, temperature, rainfall, etc. The technique, therefore, permits a rather accurate prediction of the time of spawning and the aquaculturist can plan his work well in advance. Also, the nurseries can be stocked with seed of uniform age, size and quality. Furthermore, hybrids can be produced by hand stripping and fertilization, whenever possible or feasible.
8.2.1 Hypophysation by homoplastic and heteroplastic pituitary extracts
South American, Russian and Asian aquaculturists have employed the hypophysation method for large-scale spawning of economically important fishes (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Atz and Pickford, 1959; Chaudhuri, 1968, 1969, 1976; Clemens, 1968; Singh, 1969; Donaldson, 1973; Shehadeh, 1973, 1975; Yamazaki, 1976; Fontaine, M., 1976; Chaudhuri and Tripathi, 1979; Harvey and Hoar, 1979). Maturation and ovulation have been induced in a variety of fishes including many cultivated fishes such as Prochilodus sp., Curimatus elegans (see Pickford and Atz, 1957), sturgeon, Acipenser güldenstädti and Acipenser stellatus (Gerbil'skii, 1938, 1950), catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Ramaswami and Sundararaj, 1956; Ramaswami, 1962; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1969a), catfish, Clarias batrachus (Ramaswami and Sundararaj, 1957; Devaraj, Varghese and Rao, 1972; Thakur, 1976), catfish, Clarias macrocephalus (Sidthimunka, Sanglert and Pawapootanon, 1968; Carreon, Estocapio and Enderez, 1976), the
Brazilian catfish, Rhamdia hilarii (Machado and Castagnolli, 1979), channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus (Sneed and Clemens, 1960; Clemens and Sneed, 1962), catfish, Pangasius sutchi (Potaros and Sitasit, 1976); murrel, Channa punctatus (Banerji, 1974), Indian major carps, Labeo rohita, Cirrhina mrigala, and Catla catla (Chaudhuri and Alikunhi, 1957; Chaudhuri, 1963, 1968, 1969, 1976; Bhowmick and Kowtal, 1973; Varghese et al., 1975; Varghese and Rao, 1976), grass carp, Ctenopharyngodon idella (Lin, 1965; Chaudhuri, Singh and Sukumaran, 1966; Boonbrahm, Tarnchalanukit and Chuaposhuk, 1970; Chen, Chow and Sin, 1969), silver carp. Hypophthalmichthys molitrix (Lin, 1965; Chaudhuri, Singh and Sukumaran, 1966; Boonbrahm, Tarnchalanukit and Chuaposhuk, 1970; Chen, Chow and Sin, 1969; Pruginin and Cirlin, 1976; Varghese and Rao, 1976), bighead carp, Aristichthys nobilis (Boonbrahm, Tarnchalanukit and Chuaposhuk, 1970; Chen, Chow and Sin, 1969), common carp, Cyprinus carpio
(Pickford and Atz, 1957; Clemens and Sneed, 1962; Woynarovich, 1969), rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri (Hasler, Meyer and Field, 1939; Pickford and Atz, 1957), grey mullets, Mugil cephalus (Tang, 1964; Yashouv, 1969; Shehadeh, 1973), and Mugil macrolepis (Sebastian and Nair, 1975), milkfish, Chanos chanos (Vanstone et al., 1976, 1977; Harvey and Hoar, 1979) and other marine fishes(Shelbourne, 1964) by injecting homogenates of homoplastic (same donor and recipient species) or heteroplastic (different donor and recipient species) pituitary glands.
The technique of hypophysation is now an established method for inducing spawning in cultivated fishes that mature under confined conditions (Pickford and Atz, 1957). Nevertheless, the collection of pituitary glands is not only time-consuming but involves the sacrifice of a potential broodfish or the collection of glands from fish to be marketed, which often results in considerable devaluation of the product. The alternatives of using pituitary material from trash fish or marine fishes (see Varghese et al., 1975; Varghese and Rao, 1976) or ampouling of the defatted pituitary extracts with known potency and shelflife (see Ibrahim, 1969a, b) have not found wide acceptance.
A serious drawback of the conventional hypophysation technique is the lack of standardization of the pituitary material, the demand for which generally exceeds supply. The pituitary extract is a mixture of several hypophysial hormones some of which are not even concerned with reproduction. The gonadotropic potency of the injected material depends on the stage of sexual maturity and physiological state of the donor, as well as on the method of pituitary collection and preservation (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Clemens and Sneed, 1962; Clemens, 1968; Shehadeh, 1973; Yamazaki, 1976), while its effect in the recipient depends on its sexual maturity and on donor-recipient phylogenetic relationships (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Fontaine, Y.A., 1980). Table II summarizes a number of procedures available for bioassay of gonadotropin potency of fish pituitary extracts or preparations. The radioimmunoassay techniques for precise measurements of plasma and pituitary levels of
gonadotropic hormones of fish have been standardized (see Breton et al., 1971b; 1972b; Crim, Meyer and Donaldson, 1973; Crim, Watts and Evans, 1975; Tan and Dodd, 1978; Burzawa-Gérard and Kerdelhué, 1978).
A perusal of Table II shows that there are no easy methods for determining the gonadotropic potency of the pituitary extracts and those used for assessing intraovarian oocyte development without sacrificing the fish are, at best, unsatisfactory (see Harvey and Hoar, 1979).
As a matter of fact, the fish farmer even now reckons dosages as mg wet or dry weight. of pituitary per kg body weight of the recipient. A reliable gonadotropin assay that can be performed under field conditions without the aid of sophisticated instruments is a desideratum if hypophysation is to be a success.
Limitations of the technique notwithstanding, hypophysation is still the only method available to the fish farmer for use under field conditions. Fish endocrinologists are now looking for an ovulating agent that is inexpensive, potent, with known activity and long shelflife. The only preparation now available is the acetone-dried salmon pituitary powder (see Harvey and Hoar, 1979).
8.2.2 Hypophysation by partially purified and purified gonadotropins
The mammalian gonadotropic hormones, the luteinizing hormone (LH) and the human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), are effective in inducing maturation and ovulation in fishes (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Ramaswami, 1962; Atz and Pickford, 1964; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1973, 1977a, b; Fontaine, M., 1976; Chaudhuri, 1976; Hirose, 1976). Partially purified or purified piscine pituitary gonadotropins isolated from carp and salmon have been extensively used for inducing ovulation and spawning in a number of fishes. Maturation, ovulation and spawning have been induced in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, with hCG, LH, partially purified salmon gonadotropin (SG-G100), purified carp and catfish (Heteropneustes fossilis) gonadotropin (Sundararaj and Goswami, 1966a, 1973, 1977a, b; Sundararaj and Samy, 197A; Sundararaj et al., 1976), and in the ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis, with hCG and SG-G100 (Ishida, Hirose and Donaldson, 1972; Hirose, 1976). However, in the Indian major carps, hCG
or Synahorin (a mixture of chorionic gonadotropin and mammalian pituitary extract) alone does not induce successful spawning but is effective when injected in combination with carp pituitary extract (Chaudhuri, 1976). Comparable results have been obtained in the grass carp (Lin, 1965; Chen, Chow and Sin, 1969). However, Bhowmick (1979) has recently reported on the use of crude hCG prepared in the laboratory for inducing spawning in Labeo rohita. In the grey mullet, hCG (Kuo, Shehadeh and Nash, 1973) or SG-G100 (Shehadeh, Kuo and Milisen, 1973; Kuo, Nash and Shehadeh, 1974a) alone or pituitary homogenates from grey mullet or Pacific salmon along with Synahorin (Liao, 1969, 1975; Shehadeh and Ellis, 1970), or SG-G100 along with hCG or even deoxycorticosterone (Kuo and Nash, 1975) are effective in inducing spawning. Ovulation has been reported by injecting SG-G100 in the captured milkfish females (Nash and Kuo, 1976; Vanstone, Villaluz and Tiro, 1976) and coho salmon (Jalabert
et al., 1978). Ovulation and spawning have been induced with hCG in Dicentrarchus labrax (Barnabé, 1976) and Sparus aurata (Arias, 1976; Gordin and Zohar, 1978). Nevertheless, extracts of whole fish pituitary glands in glycoprotein solvents such as trichloroacetic acid (see Ramaswami and Lakshman, 1960; Bhowmick and Chaudhuri, 1968), and partially purified or purified piscine gonadotropins are generally more potent in inducing maturation and ovulation in fishes than mammalian gonadotropins (Sundararaj and Anand, 1972; Ishida, Hirose and Donaldson, 1972; Chaudhuri, 1976; Fontaine, M., 1976). Ng and Idler (1978a, b; 1979) and Idler and Ng (1979) have recently reported the isolation of a separate maturational hormone from the pituitary glands of common carp, chum salmon, winter flounder and plaice (see section 5 on Gonadotropic hormones).
8.2.3 Hypophysation by steroids
Up until now steroids have seldom been used for large-scale breeding of cultivated species. This is surprising since evidence obtained in several laboratories has shown that progestational and adrenocortical steroids are nearly as effective as the protein hormones in inducing oocyte maturation in intact or hypophysectomized fishes; estrogenic and androgenic steroids are rarely, if ever, effective (see Sundararaj and Goswami, 1966a, 1977a, b; Sundararaj, Goswami and Lamba, 1979; Jalabert et al., 1977, 1978; Jalabert, Breton and Fostier, 1978; de Montalembert, Jalabert and Bry, 1978; Hogendoorn, 1979).
8.3 Existence of a steroidogenic relay in gonadotropin-induced maturation
Even though LH and LH-like gonadotropins could act directly on fish oocytes to induce ovulation, the possibility of mediation by other endocrine organs cannot be ruled out. In this context, it is relevant to mention that pretreatment of hypophysectomized gravid catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, with metopiron (SU-4885: Ciba), an inhibitor of 11ß-hydroxylase, greatly reduces the ovulatory response to gonadotropin (Sundararaj and Goswami, 1966b). This is a clear indication that the ovulation-inducing ability of gonadotropin is in some manner mediated through a steroidogenic tissue. This is further confirmed by studies in which maturation-inducing ability of gonadotropic preparations has been tested on oocytes (with or without follicular layers) cultured in a variety of media to isolate them from other endocrine influences (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a, 1974; Jalabert, 1976; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977a, b). The results of such in vitro experiments indicate that the action of
gonadotropin is invariably mediated through a steroidal substance whose source may be the oocyte follicle itself or another steroidogenic organ such as the interrenal.
8.4 Source of maturation-inducing steroids: The ovary versus the interrenal
Ovarian origin of maturation inducing steroids (MIS) is supported by the observation that in vitro maturation of oocytes of medaka (Hirose, 1971, 1972a, b, 1973; Iwamatsu, 1978), Misgurnus anguillicaudatus (Iwamatsu and Katoh, 1978) rainbow trout (Jalabert, Breton and Billard, 1974, Breton, Jalabert and Reinaud, 1976), brook trout and walleye (Goetz and Bergman, 1978a, b) as well as killifish (Wallace and Selman, 1978) can be induced by mammalian and piscine gonadotropins. Further, in medaka, metopiron, a specific inhibitor of 11(3-hydroxylase at low dose levels, prevents gonadotropin-induced maturation and ovulation but does not affect maturation and ovulation induced by cortisol (Hirose, 1973). These observations suggest that the gonadotropin acts first on the follicular tissue to produce an effective steroidal substance which in turn induces maturation and ovulation (Hirose, 1972b; Hirose et al., 1975; Jalabert, 1976; Iwamatsu, 1978). The follicular envelope of the oocyte
is, therefore, necessary for the gonadotropin to induce maturation (Jalabert, Breton and Bry, 1972).
On the other hand, equally impressive evidence can be cited to prove that MIS are not synthesized in the ovary but more peripherally, possibly in the interrenal. In this category, are fishes such as Misgurnus fossilis (Kirshenblatt, 1959), catfish (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a; Sundararaj, Goswami and Donaldson, 1972; Sundararaj, Goswami and Lamba, 1979), goldfish (Jalabert et al., 1973), and yellow perch (Goetz and Bergman, 1978a, b) in which mammalian or piscine gonadotropins are marginally effective in inducing oocyte maturation under in vitro conditions. Also, the demonstration that oocyte maturation in catfish is accomplished 2 h earlier following systemic administration of deoxycorticosterone acetate than following LH injection (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971b) possibly shows that the 2-h time lag represents the duration necessary for LH to act on the interrenal to build up sufficient titres of corticosteroids to induce oocyte maturation.
In catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, the only potent MIS are the 11-deoxycorticosteroids. Incubation of homogenates of gravid ovary of catfish during the spawning season with pregnenolone-7-^3H clearly shows that the catfish ovary does not have the ability to synthesize 11-deoxycorticosteroids unlike in some other fishes (see Colombo et al., 1973) but yields only two metabolites, 3a -hydroxy-5ß-pregnan-20-one (epipregnanolone) and 5ß-pregnan-3a -20a -diol (pregnanediol) (Ungar et al., 1977) the former has slight and the latter has no maturation-inducing effect.
That the ovary of the catfish does not contribute significantly towards the synthesis of MIS is clear from the above discussion. On the other hand, there is good evidence to suggest that the MIS are elaborated principally by the interrenal. Sundararaj and Goswami (1966c, 1969b) have demonstrated that in vitro synthesis of the two catfish corticosteroids (hydro-cortisone and deoxycorticosterone) can be increased several-fold by gonadotropic stimulation. Truscott et al. (1978) have recently shown that the concentration of plasma cortisol increases approximately four-fold after injection of either ovine LH or SG-G100 in the sexually regressed as well as gravid catfish. Further, ovariectomy in the sexually regressed catfish does not prevent the LH-induced rise in plasma cortisol levels. Katz and Eckstein (1974), who studied changes in steroid concentration in blood of female Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea, reported a 38-fold increase of deoxycorticosterone (DOC) during the
initiation of spawning. The source of DOC was, however, not ascertained. Nonetheless, the fact that a large increase in DOC concentration occurs in the peripheral blood during the initiation of spawning indicates its possible importance in the ovulation of this fish.
Even in the goldfish the participation of an extraovarian relay (probably interrenal) in gonadotropin-induced oocyte maturation is evident since in vitro oocyte maturation is induced by 17a -20ß-dihydroprogesterone but only marginally by carp pituitary extract, carp gonadotropin and SG-G100 (Jalabert et al., 1973; Jalabert, 1976). The recent report that the ovulatory GtH surge (Stacey, Cook and Peter, 1979) precedes the preovulatory rise in cortisol (Cook, Stacey and Peter, 1980) indicates that cortisol, presumably of interrenal origin, may be involved in GtH-stimulated ovulation in goldfish.
Further evidence in support of the interrenal origin of MIS comes from studies on the ovary-interrenal coculture where the greatly attenuated in vitro oocyte maturational ability of gonadotropins (LH or SG-G100) is restored to a great extent by inducting the interrenal tissue into the culture medium. It is clear, therefore, that not only is the interrenal the principal source of MIS but that the synthesis of MIS can be greatly stimulated by gonadotropins (Sundararaj and Goswami, 1974; Goswami, Sundararaj and Donaldson, 1974). These findings strongly suggest the existence of a pituitary-interrenal-ovarian axis in the maturation of catfish oocytes.
Jalabert (1975, 1976) has shown that some steroids such as testosterone, cortisol and cortisone, increase the maturation-inducing efficiency of gonadotropin or gonadotropic extracts. Dettlaff and Davydova (1974, 1979) have reported that triiodothyronine increases the sensitivity of follicles isolated from cold-stored sturgeon eggs to gonadotropins. These results suggest that some steroids and even thyroid hormones can sensitize the oocytes to gonadotropic action.
In vitro culture of oocytes of catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, with cortisol acetate or LH alone and in various combinations has shown that not only is cortisol acetate a much more potent maturation-inducing agent than LH but that the two hormones act synergistically over a wide range of dosages. Prior exposure of oocytes to LH or epipregnanolone for 90 min enhances subsequent cortisol action on maturation, thereby indicating that possibly LH sensitizes oocytes through the formation of epipregnanolone. Addition of testosterone or estradiol to the culture medium simultaneously with cortisol, LH or epipregnanolone markedly inhibits oocyte maturation (Sundararaj, Goswami and Lamba, 1979).
8.5 Hypotheses
The above discussion points to a dichotomy in the hormonal regulation of oocyte maturation in teleost fishes. In one group of fishes exemplified by the rainbow trout, the medaka and others, the ovary seems to be the source of MIS, whereas in the other group exemplified by the catfish, and possibly the goldfish, the interrenal seems to be the major source of MIS. This kind of diversity in reproductive adaptations is only to be expected in a group as diverse and specialized as the teleosts. We are only beginning to get an insight into this vast diversity and not unless representatives from a large number of teleostean families are investigated shall we be in a position to understand the magnitude of species variations within the teleost taxon.
8.6 Mechanism of steroid-induced oocyte maturation
While numerous investigators have tested the effectiveness of various hormones on fish oocyte maturation, few attempts have been made to understand the mechanism of hormone-induced oocyte maturation in fishes. However, some information is available in the case of two species, catfish (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1973), and rainbow trout (Jalabert, 1976). In the-former, puromycin and cycloheximide, inhibitors of protein synthesis, can completely block deoxycorticosterone-induced in vitro oocyte maturation when added to the culture medium along with or within three hours of hormonal stimulation, whereas actinomycin D and mitomycin C are totally ineffective. These findings suggest that maturation of catfish oocytes involves a de novo synthesis of protein(s) possibly through translation of preformed stable messenger RNAs; and that the process of protein synthesis is completed within three hours of hormonal stimulation.
In the case of Salmo gairdneri, where in vitro oocyte maturation can be induced by gonadotropin as well as by steroids, actinomycin D, mitomycin C or puromycin can inhibit gonadotropin-induced maturation but have no effect on maturation induced by steroids. Cycloheximide, on the other hand, completely blocks maturation-inducing action of all hormones (Jalabert, 1976). Thus, the situation in rainbow trout is somewhat different from that in catfish where both cycloheximide as well as puromycin block steroid-induced in vitro oocyte maturation.
8.7 Ovulation
In catfish (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1971a, b; Sundararaj and Goswami, 1977a, b) and yellow perch (Goetz, 1979; Goetz and Theofan, 1979), maturation in vitro is often followed by ovulation, whereas in rainbow trout maturation and ovulation are distinct phases, the steroid responsible for stimulating maturation may also initiate a process to bring about detachment of oocyte from the follicle (Jalabert, 1976). Expulsion of oocytes might involve prostaglandins since under in vitro conditions these agents induce ovulation of oocytes of trout (Jalabert and Szöllösi, 1975) and yellow perch (Goetz, 1979; Goetz and Theofan, 1979) and restore ovulation in indomethacin-inhibited goldfish (Stacey and Pandey, 1975). Stimulation of synthesis and release of prostaglandins possibly requires an extra-ovarian relay since ovulation does not normally follow steroid-induced in vitro maturation (Jalabert and Szöllösi, 1975).
8.8 Ovulating agents other than gonadotropins and steroids
The role of hypothalamic hormones in stimulating the pituitary gland to secrete gonadotropin has been discussed in section 3 on the. hypothalamus.
In addition to steroids, a synthetic nonsteroidal antiestrogen - clomiphene citrate - has been used to induce ovulation in a number of fishes (Harvey and Hoar, 1979). It induces maturation and ovulation in intact (Pandey and Hoar, 1972) but not in hypophysectomized goldfish (Pandey, Stacey and Hoar, 1973). Kapur and Toor (1979) have induced spawning in the common carp following treatment with clomiphene, whereas Bhowmick et al. (1979) failed to induce ovulation in Labeo rohita with clomiphene citrate. Breton, Jalabert and Fostier (1975) reported that treatment with cis-clomiphene induces gonadotropin surge in the common carp at low but not at high dosages. Abraham (1975) has suggested that clomiphene can be used to overcome arrested ovarian development in grey mullet reared in freshwater. Clomiphene possibly acts by interfering with the steroid feedback at the level of the hypothalamo-hypophysial system by competing with estrogen (see Pandey and Hoar, 1972) and thereby
counteracts its negative feedback effect (see also section 11 on Feedback action of gonadal steroids).
<section>a</section>
9. THE TESTES
9.1 Morphology
9.2 Cellular source of steroid hormones
9.3 Androgenic steroids
9.4 Sex accessory glands
9.5 Sex recognition and pheromones
9.1 Morphology
The testes of teleost fishes show greater morphological variation than in other vertebrates (Lofts, 1968; Dodd, 1972; de Vlaming, 1974; Callard et al., 1978). Inmost cases, testes are a pair of elongated structures composed of branching seminiferous tubules embedded in the stroma. The testis consists of thin-walled tubules or lobules that contain germ cells - the spermatogonia - which are endodermal in origin. Germ cells divide in clusters enclosed by a cyst. Primary spermatogonia - the stem cells - which are present throughout the year, divide mitotically to give rise to secondary spermatogonia which get transformed into primary spermatocytes. They divide by meiosis and give rise to spermatids from which spermatozoa are formed. The seminiferous tubules are packed with spermatozoa in the pro-spawning and spawning periods,
9.2 Cellular source of steroid hormones
Lofts and Bern (1972) and Guraya (1976b, 1979) have summarized the. literature on cellular sources of testicular steroids in teleost fishes. Leydig cells or interstitial cells, the large polygonal cells usually located within the interlobular spaces, produce androgen (Guraya, 1976b; Hoar and Nagahama, 1978). Lobule boundary eel Is which are homologous with Sertoli cells, are not convincingly steroidogenic in Cichlosoma nigrofasciatus (Nicholls and Graham, 1972), in salmon and goldfish (Hoar and Nagahama, 19787 and Mystus vittatus (Saidapur and Nadkarni, 1976). van den Hurk et al. (1978), who have made an ultrastructural and enzyme cytochemical study of the testis in rainbow trout, reported that the Leydig cells are the main. source of steroids and the steroidogenic activity is at a peak when the testes are mature and new spermatogonia are being formed; Sertoli. cells also have enzymes involved in steroidogenesis when males are in spermiation. Further, stromal cells around
the vas dererens epithelium are also steroidogenic when spermatozoa are stored in the. lumen of vas deferens (see Guraya, 1976b).
9.3 Androgenic steroids
Bilateral castration followed by replacement therapy experiments have clearly shown that in teleost males, androgenic steroids are. produced by the testes and regulate secondary sexual characters, sex accessories and sexual behaviour (Dodd, 1960; de Vlaming, 1974; Callard et al., 1978).
Testosterone, androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone have been extracted and isolated from the testes of a wide variety of fishes (see Ozon, 1972a) and the biosynthetic pathways involved in the formation of androgens have been reviewed by Ozon (1972a), Colombo and Colombo Belvedere (1977) and Tamaoki (1980). Testosterone and androstenedione have been. obtained following incubation or various steroid precursors with testicular pieces or homogenates from different species of teleost fishes (Arai, Shikita and. Tamaoki, 1964; Chan and Phillips, 1969; Colombo, Lupo and Binder, 1970; Colombo, del Conte and Clemenze, 1972; Colombo, Pesavento and Johnson, 1.972; Lupo, Matterazzi and Chieffi, 1970).
A unique steroid, 11-ketotestosterone, was first isolated and identified in the plasma of sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka (Idler, Schmidt and Ronald, 1960). Incubation of testicular homogenates of rainbow trout and the Atlantic salmon with androstenedione and testosterone also yields 11-ketotestosterone and 11ß-hydroxytestosterone suggesting the testicular origin of the 11-oxygenated steroids found in the plasma (Arai and Tamaoki, 1967a, b; Idler and MacNab, 1967; Idler, Truscott and Stewart, 1968; Kime, 1979). The androgenic activity of 11-ketotestosterone is 10 (Arai, 1967) to 17 (Tamaoki, 1980) times that of testosterone and it is considered to be the true androgenic hormone in fishes. 11-oxygenated androgens have been isolated from in vitro incubations of appropriate precursors with testicular tissue of 12 species of teleost fishes belonging to six different orders (see Colombo and Colombo Belvedere, 1975; Kime, 1979). The conversion of androstenedione to
11-ketotestosterone via testosterone and 11(3-hydroxytestosterone has been postulated as the major biosynthetic pathway in fish testes (Idler, Truscott and Stewart, 1968; Tamaoki, 1980). Formation of 11-ketotestosterone from tritiated testosterone by testes is optimum between 6° and 21°C in rainbow trout and 11° and 36°C in goldfish thus corresponding broadly to favoured breed ins temperatures, whereas testosterone glucuronide formation is optimal from 21°-37°C in rainbow trout and 21°-41°C in goldfish (Kime, 1979). Glucuronidation may play a role in limiting androgen production to the biologically preferred environmental temperature for the species.
Androgens have been estimated from plasma of many teleost fishes (see Ozon, 1972a; Schreck, Flickinger and Hopwood, 1972; Schreck, Lackey and Hopwood, 1972; Schreck and Hopwood, 1974; Campbell, Walsh and Idler, 1976; Wingfield and Grimm, 1977; Simpson and Wright, 1977; Billard et al., 1978; Sangalang, Freeman and Flemming, 1978; Sundararaj, Lamba and Goswami, 1980).
9.4 Sex accessory glands
Seminal vesicles, the sex accessory glandular structures, attached to the testes have been reported in various species of catfishes and gobiid fishes (Sundararaj, 1958; Dodd, 1.960). They show seasonal variations in secretory activity correlated with those of the testes (Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1970a). A synergism among androgen, prolactin and growth hormone has been demonstrated in the regulation of secretory activity in the seminal vesicles of catfish, Heteropneustes fossills (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1969a, b; Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1969, 1970b) and the gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis (de Vlaming and Sundararaj, 1972). The secretion contains mucoproteins and acid mucopolysacharides. The presence of secretory seminal vesicles enhances the fertilizing capacity of males (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1969c; Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1970a).
9.5 Sex recognition and pheromones
In many teleost' fishes, social communication is based on the exchange of pheromonal messages which serve to regulate territoriality, schooling, sexual and parental behaviour (see Pfeiffer, 1974). Very little information is available on fish pheromones and many workers have suggested that gonadal secretions may provide the signals for sexual recognition in many fishes (Liley, 1969). It has been proposed that the mesorchial glandular mass of the testis of the black goby, Gobius jozo (Colombo, Colombo Belvedere and Pilati, 1977) and Gobius paganellus (Stanley, Chieffi and Botte, 1965) may be a source of pheromonal steroids. In both species, the impressive steroidogenic apparatus seems to satisfy the necessity for producing huge amounts of steroid conjugates as glucuronides (Colombo, Colombo Belvedere and Marconato, 1979). In Gobius jozo, etiocholanolone glucuronide attracts the ripe. female and triggers the release of eggs (Colombo, Colombo Belvedere and Marconato, 1979).
Formation of water-soluble conjugates possibly facilitates secretion into the surrounding medium.
<section>b</section>
10. HORMONAL REGULATION OF SPERMATOGENESIS AND SPERMIATION
10.1 Effects of mammalian and piscine gonadotropins
10.2 Effects of androgens
10.3 Spermiation
10.1 Effects of mammalian and piscine gonadotropins
Spermatogonial proliferations proceed in some fishes studied even in the absence of the pituitary gland (Barr, 1968; Lofts, Pickford and Atz, 1966) even though at a retarded rate (Ahsan, 1966b; Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1967). Mammalian gonadotropins such as luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG), as well as piscine gonadotropins have been tested for testicular stimulation in several fishes (see Pickford and Atz, 1957; Dodd, 1960, 1972; de Vlaming, 1974). Ovine LH induces spermatogenesis in the regressed testes of Blennius sphinx (Blüm, 1972), whereas hCG stimulates testicular hydration in intact Gillichthys mirabilis at both 12° and 27°C (de Vlaming, 1974). Mammalian LH, but not FSH, reinitiates spermatogenesis in the hypophysectomized Fundulus heteroclitus (Pickford and Atz, 1957) and Couesius plumbeus (Ahsan, 1966b). In methallibure-treated Cymatogaster aggregata, treatment
with LH reinitiates the arrested spermatogenesis (Wiebe, 1969). In hypophysectomized cat-fish, Heteropneustes fossilis, partially purified salmon gonadotropin (SG-G100) (Sundararaj et al., 1971; Nayyar et al., 1976), LH and hCG but not FSH (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1967; Sundararaj and Anand, 1972) reinitiate and maintain spermatogenesis. In the intact Sarotherodon (Tilapia) leucosticta, hCG treatment increases plasma androgen levels (Hyder, Shah and Krischner, 1970).In Gillichthys mirabilis SG-G100 prevents warm-temperature-induced testicular regression (de Vlaming, 1974) and in hypophysectomized goldfish, carp gonadotropin maintains spermatogenesis (Billard, Burzawa-Gérard and Breton, 1970). On the other hand, mammalian LH and hCG do not activate spermatogenesis in the hypophysectomized goldfish (Billard and Escaffre, 1973) and hypophysectomized Gillichthys mirabilis (de Vlaming, 1974), respectively. Pickford et al. (1972) reported an interesting observation that mammalian
growth hormone accelerates Spermatogonial multiplication, while LH stimulates later stages of spermatogenesis in Fundulus heteroclitus.
10.2 Effects of androgens
Promotion of spermatogenesis by gonadotropins (piscine or mammalian) is mediated through the formation of androgens (Dodd, 1960, 1972; de Vlaming, 1974; Hoar and Nagahama, 1978). Testosterone propionate hastens germ cell maturation in Lebistes reticulatus (Eversole, 1941). In the hypophysectomized Fundulus heteroclitus, androgens stimulate increase in testicular size and spermatogenesis (Lofts, Pickford and Atz, 1966). In the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis testosterone, albeit in high doses, not only reinitiates but also maintains complete spermatogenesis (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1967; Sundararaj et al., 1971; Nayyar et al., 1976). Testosterone treatment does not activate spermatogenesis in Sarotherodon (Tilapia) sp. pretreated with methallibure (Hyder, 1972) but restores secondary sexual characters and spawning behaviour (Dadzie, 1973).
10.3 Spermiation
There is very little information in the literature on the phenomenon of Spermiation which involves hydration of the testes and ejection of spermatozoa from the seminiferous tubules in a medium, the milt. The process is mediated by the secretory cells lining the sperm duct as in the salmonids, the seminal vesicles as in catfishes and gobiid fishes and even by the Sertoli cells. The work on endocrine regulation of Spermiation has been reviewed by Clemens and Grant (1964, 1965), Yamamoto and Yamazaki (1967) and Grant, Pang and Griffith (1969). Hypophysectomy blocks while SG-G100 stimulates Spermiation in goldfish, (Yamazaki, 1962; Yamazaki and Donaldson, 1968a) and in the. immature Oncorhynchus gorbuscha (Donaldson et al., 1972a; Funk and Donaldson, 1972). Gonadal hydration and seminal thinning responses have been demonstrated in common carp and rainbow trout after pituitary injections (Clemens and Grant, 1964, 1965). A partially purified gonadal hydration principle has been
isolated from the pituitary of the common carp (Clemens et al., 1964). In goldfish, gonadotropins act on Leydig cells to promote androgen secretion which in turn stimulates the Sertoli cells in the spermiation response (Yamazaki and Donaldson, 1969). In the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Sundararaj et al., 1971), and in the intact grey mullet, Mugil cephalus (Donaldson and Shehadeh, 1972; Shehadeh, Madden and Dohl, 1972), Spermiation can be induced with SG-G100 but not by LH and testosterone.
Sanchez-Rodriguez et al. (1978) have studied variations in plasma gonadotropin (GtH), total androgens as well as other parameters such as spermatocrit In the milt of rainbow trout up to 12 weeks following the onset of Spermiation. The beginning of Spermiation is associated with low sperm count and high levels of GtH. Significant sperm production occurs several weeks later when GtH levels decrease and androgen levels increase. Thus, both GtH and androgens may be involved in Spermiation in the second and more active phase of spermiation.
<section>c</section>
11. FEEDBACK ACTIONS OF GONADAL STEROIDS
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Effects of gonadectomy and sex steroid therapy on the hypothalamus and pituitary
11.3 Feedback actions of sex steroids on gonadotropin secretion
11.1 Introduction
The information thus far discussed in sections 7, 8 and 10 indicates that the gonadotropic hormones (section 5) regulated the activity of the gonads through the production of steroid hormones (sections 6 and 9). The sex steroids not only regulate reproduction, sexual behaviour and secondary sexual characters but also gonadotropin secretion (de Vlaming, 1974). These effects of sex steroids are mediated in part by their actions on the central nervous system. Information is now available concerning the specific brain areas involved in the regulation of gonadal functions (section 3). The sex steroids act on their target sites in the brain and through the neurosecretory principles regulate the release of gonadotropin (GtH) from the pituitary. This mode of control of GtH release by blood sex steroid levels is known as feedback mechanism. There are examples of positive and negative feedback actions (Peter, 1973; Peter and Crim, 1979).
11.2 Effects of gonadectomy and sex steroid therapy on the hypothalamus and pituitary
Castration induces hypertrophy of gonadotropic cells and hypersecretion of gonadotropin; the effects can be reversed by administration of estradiol or testosterone. Robertson (1958) reported de-granulation of gonadotropic cells in the pituitary and accelerated development of tastes in the rainbow trout after unilateral castration. Similarly, unilateral ovariectomy in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, results in compensatory hypertrophy of the remaining ovary during all periods except the postspawning period; the time interval required for the remaining ovary to achieve full compensatory hypertrophy decreases with the proximity of the surgery to the spawning season (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1968a). Administration of estradiol benzoate blocks ovarian compensatory hypertrophy (Goswami and Sundararaj, 1968b) as well as vitellogenesis in intact catfish (Sundararaj and Goswami, 1968). In the same species, bilateral gonadectomy results in hyperactivity of the gonadotropic cells
in both sexes (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1969a; Anand and Sundararaj, 1975) and the inhibitory effect of sex steroids operates via. hypothalamic neurosecretory cells and pituitary (Viswanathan and Sundararaj, 1974b). Similarly, ovariectomy in another catfish, Clarias batrachus, increases neurosecretory material in the nucleus preopticus (NPO) which decreases after estrogen treatment (Dixit, 1970).
11.3 Feedback actions of sex steroids on gonadotropin secretion
In rainbow trout, bilateral castration at any stage of the testicular cycle, including the, period when the testes are inactive, increases plasma GtH levels (Billard, Richard and Breton, 1.976, 1977; Billard, 1978a). These results indicate that the negative feedback action of testicular steroids on GtH secretion occurs at all stages in the breeding cycle.
Sex steroids are taken up and sequestered in the pituitary, the NPO, the nucleus lateralis tuberis (NLT), the nucleus recessus lateralis and other locations in the brain in many species of fishes, suggesting that a number of sites in the brain can serve as loci for feedback action of sex steroids (Kim. et al., 1978; Peter and Crim, 1979). In the sexually mature female goldfish, serum GtH levels increase markedly following implantation of antiestrogens in the pituitary, whereas similar implants in the NLT area result only in a modest GtH increase and have no effect when implanted elsewhere (Billard and Peter, 1977). Thus the NLT and pituitary appear to be the principal sites for feedback action of estrogens in the female goldfish. In rainbow trout, the postcastration rise in plasma GtH can be partially blocked by implantation of 11-ketotestosterone in the pituitary (Billard, 1978a). In the Atlantic salmon parr, testosterone has a positive feedback action on GtH secretion,
since testosterone implants in brain (NLT) or pituitary result in a rapid increase in GtH levels in the pituitary (Crim and Peter, 1978; Crim and Evans, 1979, 1980).
In the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis, the transition from the vitellogenic phase to the maintenance phase is accompanied by a drop in plasma levels of estradiol and an increase in the levels of testosterone (Sundararaj, Lamba and Goswami, 1980). Since testosterone. is reported to have a positive feedback effect on GtH in other fishes (see Crim and Peter, 1978; Crim and Evans, 1.980), it is surmised that in catfish also, high levels of testosterone during the maintenance phase may help in storage of GtH for eventual release as a surge to induce maturation and ovulation.
<section>d</section>
12. PRESERVATION OF SPERMATOZOA AND OVA
12.1 Introduction
12.2 Quality of gametes
12.3 Methods of preservation of gametes
12.1 Introduction
The literature on gametes of fishes, though voluminous, rarely deals with the quality of gametes in terms of motility and survival of spermatozoa or the. degree of ripeness of ova (see Kuo, Shehadeh and Milisen, 1973; Barnabé, 1976; Fujiya, 1979). Some information is, however, available on the salmonid fishes (Bagenal, 1969; Gall, 1974; Lindberg, 1979), where ova from females spawning for the first time are reported to be smaller and inferior as compared to those from the second and subsequent spawnings (Gall; 1974) even though their chemical composition is similar (Philipps and Dumas, 1959). Hulata, Moav and Wohlfarth (1974) have reported on gonad development and the size of ova from the European and Chinese races of common carp. According to Billard, Dupont and Barnabé. (1977) the duration and intensity of motility of spermatozoa of Dicentrarchus labrax decrease as the spawning season progresses.
12.2 Quality of gametes
12.2.1 Spermatozoa
12.2.2 Ova
12.2.1 Spermatozoa
The sperm, which is immotile in the testis, becomes motile on contact with the medium in which fertilization takes place. Osmotic pressure, pH, and ionic content of the medium, particularly calcium, may be important in the activation of spermatozoa (Sundararaj and Nayyar, 1969c; Nayyar and Sundararaj, 1970a; Hines and Yashouv, 1971). The duration of activity of spermatozoa varies with the species and is generally not longer than a couple of minutes (see Harvey and Hoar, 1979).
The most crucial aspects of gametes, which are of practical significance in aquaculture, pertain to survival and motility of spermatozoa. In the males of most species, dense semen having highly motile spermatozoa can often be obtained without injection (Hines and Yashouv, 1971; Billard, 1978b). Administration of pituitary extracts or gonadotropin brings about thinning of the seminal plasma which facilitates spermiation. The hormonal regulation of spermiation has been discussed in section 11.
12.2.2 Ova
The ripeness of eggs is of great significance in aquaculture. Overripeness of ova can be avoided by proper timing of stripping since ripe ova remaining unspawned for long periods after ovulation become overripe and do not develop normally (Nomura, Sakai and Takashima, 1974; Sakai et al., 1975; Takashima, Nomura and Sakai, 1975). Further, it is not uncommon to come across the phenomenon of "plugging" in gravid females subjected to overdoses of hormones during hypophysation. In such cases, maturation and ovulation takes place but natural spawning cannot be accomplished since a mass of ovarian eggs forms a plug at the urogenital opening preventing the free flow of eggs. The causes for "plugging" have not been investigated at all and merit study.
12.3 Methods of preservation of gametes
In a large number of cultivated species, the maturation of gonads in the two sexes is not synchronous. Often, the male shows testicular recrudescence earlier than the female (see section 2 on Reproductive cycles and environmental cues). This results in a situation where at the beginning of the spawning season the males are active while the females are not yet ready for spawning and vice versa towards the end of the breeding season. Under such circumstances, it would be prudent to preserve the gametes for use in artificial fertilization as and when required. Further, establishment of a reserve of genetic material having known and desired qualities is important for initiation of selective breeding programmes.
While considerable research has been conducted on preservation of spermatozoa in the salmonids, very little attention has been bestowed on the tropical species of cultivated fishes (see Wiltzius, 1973; Shehadeh, 1975; Horton and Ott, 1976; Erdahl and Graham, 1978; Mounib, 1978; Harvey and Hoar, 1979). Apart from rainbow trout (Billard and Jalabert, 1974; Billard et al., 1974; Horton and Ott, 1976; Zell, 1978), spermatozoa of carps, Cyprinus carpio (Moczarski, 1977; Stein and Bayrle, 1978; Pavlovici and Vlad, 1976), Aristichthys nobilis (Sin, 1974), Ctenopharyngodon idella (Harvey and Hoar, 1979), Labeo rohita (Harvey and Hoar, 1979), and Mugil cephalus (Pruginin and Cirlin, 1975; Chao, Chen and Liao, 1975) have been subjected to cryopreservation (cooling and storage at subzero temperatures of liquid nitrogen -196°C) by using either dimethyl sulfoxide, glycerine, ethylene glycol or other cryoprotectants and diluents; dimethyl sulfoxide gives superior results (Guest, Avault
and Roussel, 1976). Details concerning the ratios of diluent and cryoprotectant used, freezing rate, storage and thawing techniques have been reviewed by Harvey and Hoar (1979). Since cryopreservation requires liquid nitrogen, fish spermatozoa may be frozen, like those of cattle and livestock at artificial insemination centres using the same facilities. The requirements for short-term preservation of spermatozoa are more easily met with than those for cryopreservation (see Harvey and Hoar, 1979). Semen from common carp has been successfully stored at 0° to 5°C for up to 5 h (Hulata and Rothbard, 1979), while that from rainbow trout has been stored at -2°C for up to three weeks (Stoss, Büyükhatipoglu and Holtz, 1978). Similarly, semen of Lates calcarifer has been stored under refrigeration (Manevonk et al., 1978). Milt from Labeo rohita maintains its fertilizing capacity for up to 4 h when stored in 1 percent glycerine in frog Ringer solution at 28°C (Bhowmick and Bagchi,
Attempts at cryopreservation of ova have not been as Successful as for sperm. Zell (1978) has reported the first successful cryopreservation of unfertilized ova and zygotes of salmonid fishes. Ova frozen in liquid nitrogen at -20°C for 5 min proved to be fertile, While zygotes frozen to -50°C survived the exposure. All other reports describe unsuccessful attempts to cryopreserve eggs of other species (see Harton and Ott, 1976). Davenport, Vahl and Lönning (1979) and Pullin and Bailey (1979) have described attempts to prolong the incubation of plaice ova at subzero temperature after prior embryonation to various stages. Prolongation of embryonation may spread the availability of ova over short spans of time.
<section>e</section>
13. USE OF SEX STEROIDS IN SEX REVERSAL
Among the techniques employed to restrict fertility is the application of hormones to produce monosex populations. Some success has been achieved in the development of such mono-sex cultures by the use of androgenic and estrogenic steroids for masculinization of genotypic females and feminization Of genotypic males, respectively (Jalabert et al., 1974; Guerrero, 1975, 1979; Shelton, Hopkins and Jensen, 1978).
Tilapia, a favoured fish for culture in native Africa and elsewhere, is known to attain sexual maturity at an early age and breed repeatedly at short intervals thereafter. This often results in stunted growth due to crowded conditions for energy is expended for reproduction rather than for growth, (Hickling, 1968). Masculinization of genotypic females of three species of tilapia, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambicus, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) nilotica, Sarotherodon (Tilapia) zilli and Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea, has been achieved by feeding methyltestosterone and ethynyltestosterone in the diet to fry, and similarly monosex female tilapia have been produced by treatment with estrone, ethynylestradiol and stilbesterol (Hopkins, Shelton and Engle, 1979; Guerrero, 1979), While steroid administration is capable of reversing sex in tilapia, the percentage of fishes showing sex reversal is highly variable. Since the presence of only a few males in an all-female population or vice
versa often jeopardizes the very purpose of monosex cultures, it is imperative that nature and amount of sex-reversing substances be reinvestigated to obviate chances of failure.
Similar experiments to produce monosex fishes have been conducted on salmonids (Johnstone, Simpson and Walker, 1979) and several other species (Stanley, 1979). A novel technique for producing sterility by inducing autoimmune gonad destruction in the Atlantic Salmon has been reported (Laird et al., 1978). Since some of the cultivable marine and brackishwater species such as Sparus auratus, Polynemus sexfilis and Lates calcarifer, are protandrous, while a few others like members of genus Epinephelus are protogynous, sex reversal is now receiving attention (see Reinboth, 1980). Chen et al. (1977) have accelerated sex inversion in Epinephelus tauvina to produce male broodstock from 3-year old females by oral administration of methyltestosterone. This technique has great potential in aqua-culture since natural sex inversion can take a Very long time (Moe, 1969; Dipper and Pullin, 1979).
<section>f</section>
14. THE PINEAL
14.1 Morphology
14.2 Pineal and reproduction
14.3 Pineal secretions
14.4 Pineal and gonadal activity
14.5 Role of pineal in the regulation of reproductive cycles
14.1 Morphology
The pineal organ shows considerable anatomical diversity among the various species of Vertebrates which is evident at all levels from gross morphology to the ultrastructure of the constituent cells. The pineal complex in fishes is generally composed of a hollow pineal vesicle and a pineal stalk which is associated with habenular ganglia, habenular and posterior commissures and sub-commissural organ. The pineal vesicle contains three morphologically distinct cell types: the sensory cell, the supporting cell, and the ganglion cell. Of these, the sensory cells are the most abundant (Holmgren, 1959) and are chiefly located in the vesicular area on the sides of the lumen (Hafeez and Ford, 1967). The sensory cells have an outer and an inner segment, the former has numerous membranous saccules while the latter often has dense particles, mitochondria and oil droplets. A sensory cilium (connecting piece) extends from the inner segment and gives rise to membranous saccules comprising
the outer segment. Electron microscopic studies also suggest a photoreceptive function for the pineal organ of fishes (Takahashi and Kasuga, 1971); Oguri and Omura, 1973; Urasaki, 1976). Further the photosensory cells of the teleost pineal have been shown to be similar to the ciliary type of photosensory cells present in the retina and possess cone-like characteristics (Breucker and Horstmann, 1965; Oksche and Kirschstein, 1967).
Though the pineal organ in fishes has long been a subject of research and review, little is known about its physiology (Fenwick, 1970a; Hafeez, 1971). It is generally believed that in fishes the pineal has a photosensory or photoreceptive function (see reviews by Holmgren, 1959, 1965; Kelly, 1962; van de Kamer, 1965) though some authors (Hafeez and Ford, 1967; Rizkalla, 1970; Hafeez, 1971) have also attributed a secretory function to the pineal organ, Most morphological studies on the teleost pineal suggest a dual sensory and secretory function to this organ (for reviews see Fenwick, 1970a; Hafeez, 1971; de Vlaming, 1974).
14.2 Pineal and reproduction
Investigations of Hafeez, Wagner and Quay (1978) have revealed differential responsiveness of various pineal cells to environmental lighting; the supporting cells are influenced only by the photic input from lateral eyes, while receptor cells are responsive to incident light input through the pineal region. That the pineal serves a photosensitive function in teleost fishes is suggested by observations on light-mediated behaviour of fishes and by experiments on phototactic and chromatophore responses as also by electrophysiological studies (Dodt, 1963; Fenwick, 1970a; Morita and Bergmann, 1971).
In recent years, data have fast accumulated to implicate the teleostean pineal in several physiological control mechanisms, especially in responses to photoperiod (de Vlaming, 1975a, b; Delahunty, Schreck and de Vlaming, 1977; Delahunty et al., 1978; Olcese and de Vlaming, 1977; de Vlaming and Vodicnik, 1978; Vodicnik et al., 1978). Pinealectomy induces changes in plasma osmolarity and electrolytes (Weisbart and Fenwick, 1966; Fenwick, 1970c; de Vlaming et al., 1979), and plasma cortisol levels in goldfish (Delahunty, Schreck and de Vlaming, 1977)":
Limited investigations have been conducted on the possible role of the pineal organ in influencing circadian locomotory rhythms in fishes (Fenwick, 1970a; Delahunty et al., 1978; Matty, 1978; Kavaliers, 1979; Sundararaj and Garg, 1980).
14.3 Pineal secretions
Hydroxyindole-0-methyl transferase (HIOMT) which catalyzes the conversion of N-acetyl serotonin to melatonin has been demonstrated in the pineal as well as the. brain of some species of fishes (Quay, 1965; Owman and Rüdeberg, 1970; Smith and Weber, 1974, 1976a, b). The pineal of teleost fishes has been assumed to be independent of retina, unlike in mammals where it is innervated by sympathetic nerves and receives photic input from eyes (Wurtman, Axelrod and Kelly, 1968). In rainbow trout, HIOMT and melatonin levels show diurnal fluctuations with highest levels in the scotophase portion of the light-dark cycle (Smith and Weber, 1976b; Gern, Owens and Ralph, 1978a, b). However, trout retina contains melatonin in highest concentrations during the photophase portion of the light-dark cycle and pinealectomy disturbs neither the rhythm nor the titer of retinal melatonin (Gern, Owens and Ralph, 1978b). Further, blinding abolishes the photoperiod-induced HIOMT cycles in the pineal
of rainbow trout, whereas capping of the pineal to direct illumination does not affect these cycles (Smith and Weber, 1976b). According to Fenwick (1970d) the phototactic response of goldfish is dependent upon the presence of the pineal as well as eyes.
14.4 Pineal and gonadal activity
Pineal melatonin has been suggested to possess antigonadal properties in a number of vertebrate species (see Minneman and Wurtman, 1976). It can induce marked changes in neuroendocrine and gonadal activities in a number of fishes (Fenwick, 1970b; Urasaki, 1972a, 1977; de Vlaming, Sage and Charlton, 1974; Sundararaj and Keshavanath, 1976; Saxena and Anand, 1977).
Recent studies have demonstrated that melatonin has progonadal properties also and that it inhibits the antigonadal activities of the pineal (Reiter et al., 1975). This ambivalent action of melatonin depends on dose, mode and time of administration, and the photoperiod to which the experimental animals are exposed. However, all the observed antigonadal activities of the pineal extracts cannot be explained by its melatonin content. Therefore, it has been suggested that the pineal may contain several other antigonadotropic substances (see Benson et al., 1976; Ebels, 1976) in the form of some unidentified proteins and polypeptide hormones. Injections of arginine vasotocin (AVT) inhibit compensatory ovarian hypertrophy and prolong the diestrus in the mice (Vaughan and Blask, 1978). Recently, Holder et al. (1979) have reported the existence of AVT in the pineal of teleost fishes.
14.5 Role of pineal in the regulation of reproductive cycles
The available evidence indicates that in teleost fishes the pineal organ plays an important role in the regulation of several physiological processes including reproduction (see Fenwick, 1970a; de Vlaming, 1974; Matty, 1978; Ralph, 1978a, b).
Effects of pinealectomy on reproduction in teleost fishes vary considerably with the species, season and conditions of photoperiod. Krockert (1936a, b) was the first to propose that the. pineal exerts an inhibitory influence on the reproductive function. Schonherr (1955) in Gasterosteus aculeatus, Rasquin (1958) in Astyanax mexicanus. Pang (1967) in Fundulus heteroclitus, and Peter (1968) in Carassius auratus, failed to detect any effect of pinealectomy on gonads. Investigators, more often than not, have not mentioned the photo-period conditions, the time of the year when experiments were conducted, the gonadal maturation stage at the end of the experiment and whether or not gonadal activity was stimulated under laboratory conditions. The importance of such information has been emphasized by Fenwick (1970a, b, c), Urasaki (1972a, b, c), de Vlaming (1975a) and de Vlaming and Vodicnik (1977, 1978). Gonadal regression ensues following pinealectomy in recrudescing and mature
golden shiners (de Vlaming, 1975a) and goldfish (de Vlaming and Vodicnik, 1978) kept under long photoperiod and warm temperature as well as in sexually recrudescing golden shiner maintained under long photoperiod and low temperatures. In medaka under conditions of long photoperiod, pinealectomy and/or blinding causes gonadal regression (Urasaki, 1972a, 1973, 1976). However, pinealectomy had no effect under short photoperiod in cold (12°C) temperature (de Vlaming, 1975a), whereas pinealectomy accelerated gonadal recrudescence in spring in goldfish kept under short photoperiod at 13°C (Fenwick, 1970c) or at 20°C (de Vlaming and Vodicnik, 1978). Under short photoperiod and warm temperature, gonadal development is accelerated after pinealectomy in both golden shiner and medaka (de Vlaming, 1975a, Urasaki, 1973, 1976). In fishes where increasing daylength and long photoperiod in the spring stimulate gonadal recrudescence (see de Vlaming, 1972a; Peter and Crim, 1979), the pineal
as well as the eyes may have a role in promoting gonadal recrudescence under long photoperiods and in supressing gonadal activity under short photoperiods (Hontela and Peter, 1980). Therefore, the pineal organ can be antigonadal or progonadal during different seasons depending on daylength conditions.
An overall review of the functional aspects of the pineal in fishes reveals that the pineal modulates physiological activities to facilitate breeding during the proper season and to prevent, breeding during the unfavourable seasons of the year. Precision in breeding periodicity is an adaptation to synchronize the emergence of fry with the availability of proper food, which itself is subject to cycles of seasonal abundance.
<section>g</section>
15. APPLICATION OF BASIC RESEARCH TO IMPROVE PROPAGATION OF CULTIVATED SPECIES
15.1 Introduction
15.2 Reproductive cycles and environmental cues
15.3 The Hypothalamus
15.4 The pituitary gland
15.5 The gonadotropic hormones
15.6 The ovary
15.7 Hormonal regulation of vitellogenesis
15.8 Hormonal regulation of oocyte maturation and ovulation
15.9 The testis
15.10 Hormonal regulation of spermatogenesis and spermiation
15.11 Feedback actions of gonadal steroids
15.12 Preservation of gametes
15.13 Use of sex steroids in sex reversal
15.14 The pineal
15.1 Introduction
The foregoing review briefly summarizes the salient features of the reproductive physiology of teleost fishes including cultivated species. Areas where basic research input is necessary to fill gaps in our knowledge as also those that are of immediate relevance to increasing our ability to breed cultivated fishes in captivity are highlighted in this section.
The single most important desideratum for successful propagation of cultivated fishes through aquaculture is the availability of pure seed of uniform age, size and quality and free of diseases, parasites and pests at the site of culture ponds. These strict requirements are seldom fulfilled where the seed is collected from the rivers, estuaries or other natural sources. The problem has been mitigated to some extent with the advent of the hypophysation technique for spawning cultivated species. Nevertheless, even in countries where hypophysation is extensively practised, the fish seed so produced is often grossly inadequate to meet the growing requirements and has to be supplemented with collections from the wild. The principal thrust of basic research in the immediate future should, therefore, be directed towards reducing our dependence on wild collections of seed. The problem can be tackled simultaneously at two different levels. The first task is to raise sufficient number
of broodstock in captivity, and the second is to perfect the techniques of hypophysation to remove, as far as possible, the elements of uncertainty and improve the chances of success. However, any breakthrough in achieving these objectives will be possible only if basic information on the reproductive physiology of cultivated as well as laboratory fishes is available not only in areas that are of immediate relevance to aquaculture but also in those that may have no apparent bearing on aquaculture. It is also vitally important to realize that much of the existing information on the fundamental principles of reproductive physiology has emerged from work on fishes that have no economic or commercial importance but have served as excellent laboratory models all over the world to solve several problems of piscine reproductive physiology. The need for promoting coordination between laboratory research and field investigation cannot be overemphasized. A multidisciplinary
experimental approach involving the participation of scientists with diverse specializations is strongly recommended since only then can meaningful results be obtained in a short span of time.
15.2 Reproductive cycles and environmental cues
The basic principles of reproductive physiology of teleost fishes transcend species barriers, and it is, therefore, possible to discern certain trends that help in developing common working hypotheses for a number of fishes. However, environmental cues that initiate, reproductive processess to culminate in spawning during the most favourable season of the year differ in the finer nuances from one species to another and from one latitude to the next even within a species (see review of the work in section 2). A line, of investigation that must occupy a very high priority in the context of mass propagation of juveniles is the accurate delineation of the environmental factors such as photoperiod (daylength), temperature, rainfall and other biotic and abiotic factors, which promote gametogenesis in every cultivated species., This is admittedly a difficult task, for in nature, many of the factors are interlinked. For instance, if nature both daylength and temperature increase or
decrease almost contemporaneously, hence difficult to dissociate. Only under controlled conditions of the laboratory can the effects of these two factors be. dissociated to permit a proper evaluation of the effects of each factor on various phases of gametogenesis. Modern biochemical techniques may be used for measurements of plasma levels of gonadotropin and sex steroids to draw more meaningful conclusions. Clearly an interdisciplinary approach is called for.
Charts of reproductive cycles in the context of seasonal changes in environmental factors of as many cultivated species as possible have to be prepared not only in their native areas but also in the introduced areas.
Once the environmental variables (synchronizers or zeitgebers), that promote gonadal recrudescence under natural and experimental conditions are identified, the fish can be subjected to a suitable combination of individually studied environmental factors to accelerate gonadal development. Some of the obvious advantages of this line of study are: (i) advancement in sexual maturity by reduction in generation time, or conversely, postponement of sexual maturity to increase somatic growth, (ii) extension of the breeding season and reduction in the time interval between successive spawnings to get seed throughout the year, and (iii) repeated inbreeding leading to possible domestication of the species.
It would be scientifically, and in the long run commercially rewarding, if cultivated species with a wide distribution north and south of the equator are studied to determine whether gonadal recrudescence is dependent on photoperiod or temperature or both. If so, it should be determined how near the equator they would be operative.
Each species of fish has evolved to function with maximum efficiency within a particular range of temperatures which it actively selects from those available. It is important to determine if thermal preferenda of cultivated fishes coincide with the optimal temperatures conducive to spermatogenesis in males and vitellogenesis in females. If information on thermal preference is available, culture of a particular species may be recommended in waters which attain a range of temperatures optimum for growth and reproduction. Gonadal maturation in fact takes place much more rapidly at the preferred temperature than at other temperatures (see section 2). An interesting study can be planned to understand the relationship between temperature and reproductive activities for the same species at different latitudes.
Studies on thermoperiod relationship with gonadal weight gain must be given a high priority since gonadal weight gain can be stimulated or inhibited depending on the time of day when the thermocycle is commenced (see section 2). This chronobiological approach is of considerable importance to aquaculture and may hold the key to producing precociously gravid fish. Timed application of heat by releasing or recirculating thermal waters into fish ponds can help optimize growth and reproduction.
Work reviewed in section 2 shows that environmental factors favouring gonadal recrudescence are entirely different from those stimulating maturation and ovulation.
The role of dissolved gases, solute concentration in rain water, soil contributions, aquatic vegetation, smell factor, and algal metabolites in inducing spawning of freshwater fishes is poorly understood. Algal blooms present before and after monsoon rains have to be studied and those that show wide fluctuations in abundance may be cultured in the laboratory and algal metabolites identified. Results of water analysis and identification of algal metabolites in pond and river waters may throw light on environmental deficiencies in confined waters vis-à-vis flowing waters. Such investigations call for collaborative efforts among limnologists, physiologists and microbiologists.
15.3 The Hypothalamus
It is now established that the fish hypothalamus acts as a link between the environment and the endocrine system whose activity it controls through production of releasing or inhibiting factors at different times to modulate the reproductive cycle. Even though the hypothalamo-hypophysial complex has been studied in a number of cultivated species using the bulk staining techniques, stereotaxic atlases of the hypothalamic nuclei are not yet available except in goldfish, killifish and to some extent in rainbow trout (see section 3). Thus, critical studies involving selective destruction or stimulation of specific hypophysiotropic centres in the brain are not yet possible in most fishes. It is principally for this reason. that the relative contribution of the nucleus lateralis tuberis (NLT), the nucleus preopticus (NPO) and other areas of the brain in the regulation of gonadotropic activity of the pituitary is not clearly understood. Whether the NLT is the source of stimulatory
as well as inhibitory factors involved in the regulation of the reproductive functions of the pituitary is not elucidated. The role of prostaglandins in the inhibitory mechanism is also not clear and further work is necessary.
To date, only the synthetic mammalian luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) has been tried for initiating gonadotropic functions in fishes (see section 3). This peptide acts on the pituitary and brings about the release of conspecific gonadotropin which in turn acts on the gonads. Most of the superactive analogues of LH-RH synthesized by pharmacologists have to be screened for maturation and ovulation activities in cultivated fishes.
A high priority area of research with vast potentiality in aquaculture is to understand the nature of gonadotropin-releasing factor (GRF) in cultivated fishes. Isolation and characterization of GRF of fishes, though an arduous task, is well worth pursuing in view of its potential in spawning cultivated fishes. The piscine GRF molecule, once identified can be synthesized for large-scale application in aquaculture.
The potentialities of such studies are enormous. If highly potent analogues of piscine GRF are synthesized, they could be used to induce spawning in fishes bypassing the strict environmental prerequisites for the preovulatory gonadotropin surge. Also, since the injected GRF would induce gonadotropin release from the recipient's pituitary, the many problems associated with the conventional hypophysation technique (see section 8) would be solved to a very great extent. If a breakthrough in this direction is to be achieved, it would involve collaborative efforts of biochemists, pharmacologists, and fish physiologists as well as the assistance of pharmaceutical industry for mass production of the active principle.
It is anticipated that application of synthetic GRF for induction of maturation and spawning of cultivated fishes will eventually replace the existing techniques of hypophysation. However, till such time as the appropriate GRF molecules are identified, synthesized and made commercially available on a global scale, there is a vital need for improving and perfecting the existing methods of hypophysation.
15.4 The pituitary gland
The area of research suggested here falls within the realm of basic research. Bulk-staining of the hypothalamo-hypophysial complex may be resorted to in an effort to understand the morphological relationship between the various neurosecretory nuclei in the hypothalamus and the pituitary.
Many pituitary cells in the teleost fishes are directly innervated by axons arising from the nucleus lateralis tuberis or nucleus preopticus and this phenomenon is unique among the vertebrates. In some cases, the axons are in contact with the perivascular spaces surrounding groups of cells (see section 3). This can be resolved only by studying the innervation as well as vasculature of the pituitary cell types by electron microscopy.
15.5 The gonadotropic hormones
The economics of using fish gonadotropins, extracted from carps or other universal donors, for large-scale spawning of cultivated fishes is still debatable. There is, however, a possibility of future synthesis of these gonadotropins, once their amino acid sequence is worked out. Fractionation of the pituitary glands obtained from cultivated fishes has to be undertaken to determine if separate vitellogenic and maturational hormones exist. The purified hormones can then be tested in suitable models to determine the gonadotropin-sensitive phases in gametogenesis in both sexes.
The identification and purification procedures depend largely upon the availability of sensitive and specific bioassays. The ideal situation is to develop bioassay techniques using the same species to avoid species specificity problems. The bioassays used thus far have been summarized in the foregoing review (see section 8). It would be. extremely worthwhile to develop standard bioassays for testing the vitellogenic and maturational activities of various conspecific gonadotropic preparations.
The other, more practical use for purified gonadotropins, would be in detecting plasma levels of gonadotropins during various phases of the breeding cycle by radioimmunoassay. Yet another advantage, which is even more significant to aquaculture, is to develop an easy, reliable and inexpensive test for determining the gonadotropic content of pituitary extracts used in hypophysation. This test should be so simple that within a few minutes the fish farmer can estimate the gonadotropic content of the extract. Antibodies developed against purified gonadotropin (maturational) could be mixed with a suitable dye that would develop colour on addition of a known quantity of the extract containing gonadotropin; the intensity of the colour should be proportional to the concentration of the maturational hormone. The colour developed could then be compared with a set of standard colours with calibration for gonadotropic potency. Such tests should be developed for all the cultivated
species that are spawned through hypophysation.
The poor results often encountered in hypophysation work are due to many factors (see review in section 8). The effectiveness of the injected pituitary extract is greatly influenced by ambient temperature; higher the temperature faster is the uptake of the hormone from the site of injection and shorter the half-life of the hormone and vice versa. It is, therefore, highly desirable that carefully planned experiments are conducted at different temperatures to measure plasma levels of gonadotropin following injections of gonadotropin or pituitary extract in cultivated fishes that are spawned through hypophysation.
Another related study concerns the determination of the time of the day when the gonads are most sensitive to gonadotropin which may vary with the species. If this information is available, it might eventually lead to reduction in the cost of aquaculture since the required dosage of the injected extract would be less when the gonad is most sensitive.
A pituitary bank has been established by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) of FAO in Rome to cater to the needs of hypophysation research in developing countries. Pituitary glands from uneconomic fish species and from edible frogs may be collected for hypophysation work to reduce the cost of pituitary production and thus the propagation of cultivated fishes.
15.6 The ovary
The results of hypophysation will dramatically improve if safe and reliable methods are evolved for sampling ovarian oocytes. Eggs obtained by stripping or by inserting a catheter into the urogenital opening may be studied under magnification. Diameters may be determined for all stages of vitellogenesis and also for signs of follicular atresia. An atlas for oocyte development through the various stages of vitellogenesis mentioning the external appearance, colour and diameters should be prepared for each species.
The etiology and histophysiology of follicular atresia and the functions of "corpus luteum" and "corpus atrecticum" during oogenesis are poorly understood, and further investigation may be profitable especially in the maintenance of captive broodstock. Histoenzymological and electron microscopic studies coupled with those involving uptake of labelled precursors is. different compartments of the ovarian follicle may throw light on this problem.
The role of sex steroids in reproductive behaviour is an area where basic research input is necessary. The. action of sex steroids on the kidney in producing sex attractants in cultivated fishes is an interesting area of study. The sex attractant or pheromone, which may be species specific should be extracted and chemically identified. Such pheromones may be of potential value in fish culture as well as in basic studies on spawning behaviour in fishes.
15.7 Hormonal regulation of vitellogenesis
Under favourable environmental conditions, the captive broodstock of most cultivated fishes undergoes vitellogenesis. However, a few species that have been introduced to areas away from their native habitat do not always become optimally gravid in the new environment. This may possibly be due to absence or deficiency of vitellogenic hormone(s) in the fish in the exotic habitat. Whether or not vitellogenesis can be induced in such fishes by exogenous administration of hormones can be determined only if the hormonal profile in the vitellogenic female in the native habitat is worked out.
Basic studies have to be initiated to understand the stimulatory actions of piscine (vitellogenic and. maturational) and mammalian gonadotropins on various ovarian compartments during vitellogenesis. The role of sex steroids and their possible synergism with pituitary, thyroid and interrenal hormones in induction of vitellogenic and maintenance of yolky oocytes also needs to be elucidated.
A high priority should be given for the development of a simple, reliable, quick and inexpensive method for ascertaining the stage of ovarian development in the broodstock. An immune logical approach is well worth following for which vitellogenin, the egg-yolk precursor present in the blood, has to be isolated and antibodies raised against it. The antibodies could then be used to develop a simple test for detection of vitellogenin in small quantities of fish plasma. Radioimmunoassay techniques can be developed for precise estimation of vitellogenin in small plasma volumes. If the vitellogenic content can be correlated with the diameter of egg, it would prove very meaningful. Such studies should be extended to all cultivated species.
In most fishes, postspawning feeding leading to deposition of lipids and proteins in tissues and fat bodies is utilized for vitellogenin synthesis during the following vitellogenic period. In this context, the role of estrogen, anabolic androgens, prolactin and thyroxine in the vitellogenic process is not properly understood and merits further study. Dosages for estrogen supplementation have to be carefully worked out for various fishes, age groups and stages of sexual maturity, since excessive administration may lead to sterility due to negative feedback action (see section 11). Development of special diets for brood-stock that are rich in lipids, calcium, protein and other components of yolk material would be beneficial.
15.8 Hormonal regulation of oocyte maturation and ovulation
Research on several aspects of oocyte maturation and ovulation have to be initiated to improve the chances of success in hypophysation. The negative results often obtained in hypophysation can sometimes be traced to erroneous assessment of the maturity of oocytes of the recipient females. The need for development of better methods for ascertaining the vitellogenic stages of oocytes has already been highlighted.
In view of the expense and labour involved in isolating and purifying fish gonadotropins, their use in large-scale spawning of cultivated fishes may be limited even where the starting material in the form of trash fish or marine catfish is relatively abundant and inexpensive. Even the conventional technique of hypophysation with crude pituitary homogenate is becoming expensive owing to rising costs of quality pituitary material and its processing and transportation to fish culture centres. Concerted attempts have, therefore, to be made to search for newer, better and less expensive spawning agents.
Since oocyte maturation and ovulation is regulated by three levels of control mechanisms viz., the hypothalamus, the. pituitary and the ovary, it would be worthwhile to initiate research to understand the regulatory mechanisms at each of the. three levels (see sections 15.3 and 15.5).
Challenging the pituitary by LH-RH or its more potent analogues would be the closest to the normal situation since the releasing hormone would act on the pituitary r-o bring about the release of conspecific gonadotropin which in turn promotes the formation of the species specific maturation-inducing steroid (see section 15.3). Since this situation is ideal, top priority should be given to this type of research.
Work reviewed earlier has shown great promise for the use of C[21] steroids, which are the terminal hormones that initiate maturational changes at the level of the oocytes. Such Steroids, commercially synthesized from plant sterols, are relatively inexpensive and have a long shelflife. An area of research which should be accorded a very high priority is the assessment of the scope of applicability of steroid hormones in replacing protein hormones in fish culture. It is equally important to study the long-term effects of steroid hormones on the fecundity of fish and growth of fish fry and the residual activity of steroids, if any, in treated fishes.
In recent years, use of in vitro techniques for studying the effects of hormones on cultured oocytes has proved invaluable because it permits rapid and simultaneous screening of a large number of test substances on oocytes obtained from a small number of fishes. The techniques, however, necessitate formulation of suitable isoosmotic culture media for each species. Thus, suitable media for culturing oocytes have to be formulated to test the action of various gonadotropic and steroid hormones on in vitro Oocyte maturation and ovulation. Also for each species under study, the oocyte stages involved in maturation and ovulation may be studied and delineated so that some landmark stages can be identified for subsequent assessment of the in vivo effects of hormones on oocyte maturation and ovulation. Further, if maturation occurs without ovulation, some other hormone or principle such as prostaglandins or proteolytic enzymes may be involved in inducing ovulation.
Knowledge of plasma steroid profiles in gravid fishes before spawning and after gonadotropin stimulation may throw light on steroid combinations that inhibit maturation vis-à-vis those that favour this process. Thorough studies on in vitro oocyte maturation have to be conducted to test the relative effects of plasma steroids that appear in vivo following gonadotropin injection as well as those of conversion products formed by ovaries from steroid precursors. Possibly, the ovarian steroid metabolites may sensitize oocytes so that they can respond better to gonadotropin or to other steroids of ovarian or interrenal origin.
In addition, a large number of steroids, not necessarily native to the fish, may be tested for oocyte maturation-inducing activities. This will help in finding a steroid or combination of steroids which may be much more potent than those synthesized by the fish.
In vivo studies using steroids or combinations of pituitary extracts and steroids may be tried for timing of the final stages of maturation and ovulation and procedure standardized for aquacultural application.
Where and how steroids act on oocytes are poorly understood and research is needed in these areas.
Other substances such as copper salts and a wide range of antiestrogens such as clomiphene, tomaxifen and related substances have to be tried for inducing maturation and ovulation in cultivated fishes. Their potential use in inducing spawning in cultivated fishes has to await future research developments.
15.9 The testis
Some of the suggested areas of research are basic while others have great value in improving the success of hypophysation.
The steroidogenic potential of the testis at various stages of the breeding cycle should be studied using labelled precursors not only to understand the transformation products but also to determine the substrate preference in relation to the stage of sexual maturity. Temperature optima for sex steroid formation is another area that merits further Study.
Plasma levels of steroids should be determined both on circadian and circannual bases and correlated with spermatogenic stages and development of secondary sexual characters and sex accessories.
The role of sex steroids in regulating the activities of the sex accessories such as seminal vesicles and even kidney, which may be involved in the production of milt as well as sex attractants, is another important area of study (see section 9). Here too, many pituitary hormones such as growth hormone, prolactin and thyrotropin may synergize with androgens in regulating the secretory activities of sex accessory glands.
The role of sex steroids in regulating the appearance of secondary sexual characters and breeding behaviour has to be studied. Estimation of sex steroid levels may help in the determination of the sex of fish even during the nonbreeding season.
The metabolism of sex steroids and role of steroid conjugates has been studied only in a few species. Steroid conjugation facilitates its release into the medium as a sex attractant or pheromone. This work will be highly rewarding especially in spawning of cultivated fishes.
15.10 Hormonal regulation of spermatogenesis and spermiation
Studies are required to determine the effects of piscine and mammalian gonadotropins as well as sex steroids on the initiation and maintenance of Spermatogenesis. The synergistic role of other hormones such as growth hormone, prolactin, and thyroxine in influencing Spermatogenesis merits further study. Temperature optima for Spermatogenesis have to be determined for the cultivated species if acceleration of Spermatogenesis is required (see section 2).
Studies involving measurement of plasma levels of gonadotropin and various androgens during Spermatogenesis and spermiation may be initiated to gain an insight into the hormonal levels associated with the various testicular events.
A high priority area of research pertains to the evaluation of the quality of spermatozoa in terms of motility and survival in species where fertilization of hand-stripped eggs is the normal practice. Evaluation of sperm quality may be made in association with the constituents of the milt such as spermatocrit values, protein and mineral concentration, and androgens, to mention a few important parameters. These lines of investigations are important areas for further research and would have wide application in aquaculture.
15.11 Feedback actions of gonadal steroids
The recent work in this area (see section 11) shows that gonadal steroids exercise both negative and positive feedback actions on gonadotropin secretion. Since some steroids, nonsteroidal antiestrogens and related compounds, exercise a positive feedback action on gonadotropin release, it is worthwhile to start studies to determine if any of them could be used as an ovulating agent.
Except where special diets are available, cultivated fishes are routinely fed on mixtures of cereal, bran, oil cakes, other grains and slaughter-house wastes. The nature of oil cakes varies in different regions according to local availability. Some varieties of oil seeds are very rich in natural estrogens. It is not unlikely that impairment of fertility might occur as a consequence of inclusion of certain varieties of oil cakes in the fish diet. Instances where presence of certain substances in the diet result in sterility in live-stock are known.
15.12 Preservation of gametes
The review on preservation of gametes (see section 12) reveals that even though only a few of the cultivated species have been investigated, the feasibility of this technique has been fully demonstrated. Preservation of spermatozoa and ova is essential if the programme of selective breeding and hybridization has to succeed.
Since the males sometimes become sexually active earlier than females, it is necessary to preserve spermatozoa for fertilizing the ripe ova obtained later in the season.
Short-term versus long-term preservation of spermatozoa may be investigated to establish the relative advantages. Suitable media must be evolved for increasing the fertilizing capacity of sperm. The technique and methods of collection of milt and cryopreservation have to be standardized. The constituents of milt and spermatocrit values have to be determined for each species. The nature of diluents and cryoprotectants and their ratios as well as techniques of freezing, storage and thawing must be investigated thoroughly for each species. The quality of cryopreserved spermatozoa has to be evaluated.
Cryopreservation of ova has to be extended to other species. The technique of storage of spermatozoa and fertilized ova at near-zero temperature has great potential use in fish breeding and requires further research.
Sperm and ova banks can be established to safeguard rare and endangered species as also individuals with desirable qualities. Techniques such as gynogenesis and polyploidy, that manipulate chromosomes of cultivated fishes, have application in genetics and selective breeding and merit further study.
15.13 Use of sex steroids in sex reversal
The specificity of sex steroids as exogenous inducers versus endogenous inducers is not clearly determined and needs further work.
Even though monosex or sterile populations of fishes such as tilapia have been produced, there is little information on the influence of steroids on the genotype. Methods of steroid administration and the stage in the life cycle when steroid treatment is to be initiated have to be standardized to get consistent results.
The advisability of human consumption of steroid-treated fish has to be determined by studying the residual activity of steroids in treated fish.
Sex inversion in cultivated hermaphroditic fishes by steroid treatment is an important area of research which has great potential in aquaculture.
15.14 The pineal
The participation of the pineal organ in the overall scheme of endocrine control of gonadal activity is very poorly understood in fishes in general (see section 14). Its pro-gonadal and antigonadal effects are governed by so many variables, both in experimental design as well as those inherent in the fish itself, that only under strictly controlled laboratory conditions can its true physiological significance be understood. However, it is unanimously accepted that the pineal acts as a photoreceptor in almost all fishes studied and exercises both inhibitory and stimulatory effects on gonads (see section 14). It may, therefore, be important to take this organ into consideration in planning photoperiod-thermoperiod experiments involving induction of precocious gonadal recrudescence or postponement of gonadal regression.
<section>h</section>
16. CONCLUDING REMARKS
The foregoing review briefly summarizes the salient investigations on the reproductive physiology of fishes with emphasis on cultivated species. At present, there is a communication gap between fish endocrinologists working in University laboratories and fish biologists working in the field mainly on hypophysation of fish. The former workers would be conversant with the physiological and environmental regulation of reproduction, whereas the latter may often be not familiar with the recent trends in reproductive physiology. Due to limitations of space and resources, the investigator in the University laboratory has often to use smaller and easily manageable species of fish which in many cases do not have any commercial importance.
Further, the results obtained under strictly controlled conditions of the laboratory may not always be applicable to the seminatural conditions of a fish farm. Hence, there is an urgent need and a tremendous scope for collaboration between the basic research workers and the aquaculturist. It is important that research scientists should test their laboratory findings and working hypotheses under field conditions using cultivated fishes as models.
<section>i</section>
17. REFERENCES
Abraham, M., 1975 The pituitary of Mugil cephalus during adaptation to biotopes of different salinities. Aquaculture, 5:199-204
Ahsan, S.N., 1966a Effects of temperature and light on the cyclical changes in the spermatogenic activity of the lake chub Couesius plumbeus. Can. J. Zool., 44:161-71
____1966b, Effects of gonadotropic hormones on male hypophysectomized lake chub, Couesius plumbeus. Can. J. Zool., 44:703-17
Aida, K. et al., 1978 Induction of ovulation in plaice and goby with synthetic LH-releasing hormone. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 44:445-50
Amouriq, L., 1965 Origine de la substance dynamogene par Lebistes reticulatus femelle. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, 260:2334-5
Anand, T.C. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1974a Temporal effects of artificial induction of ovulation on the hypothalamo-hypophysial-ovarian system of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Neuroendocrinology, 15:158-71
____1974b, Ovarian maintenance in the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), with mammalian hypophyseal and placental hormones, and gonadal and adrenocortical steroids. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 22:154-68
____1975, Response of the pituitary of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), to bilateral ovariectomy. Acta Anat., 93:141-50
Anand, T.C., S.K. Nayyar and B.I. Sundararaj, 1975 Failure to induce vitellogenesis in the regressed ovaries of hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), with mammalian hormones. Anat. Rec., 181:520-21
Arai, R., 1967 Androgenic effects of 11-ketotestosterone on some sexual characteristics in the teleost, Oryzias latipes. Annot. Zool. Japon., 40:1-5
Arai, R. and B.I. Tamaoki, 1967a Steroid biosynthesis in vitro by testes of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 8:305-13
____1967, Biosynthesis of 11ß-hydroxytestosterone and 11-ketotestosterone in the testes of rainbow trout. Can. J. Biochm., 45:1191-5
Arai, R., M. Shikita and B.I. Tamaoki, 1964 In vitro bioconversion of progesterone -4-^14C to 17a -hydroxyprogesterone and androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione in testicular tissue of Tribolodon hakonensis Gunther. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 4:68-73
Arias, A.M., 1976 Reproduction artificielle de la daurade Sparus aurata (L.). Etud. Rev. CGPM/Stud. Rev. GFCM, (55):63-116
Arimura, A. et al., 1974 D-Ala^6, Des-Gly-NH[2]^10-LR-RH-ethylamide: A new analogue with unusually high LH-RH/FSH-RH activity. Endocrinology, 95:1174-7
Arnold, C.R. et al., 1978 Spawning of red snapper (Lutjanus campechanus) in captivity. Aquaculture, 15:301-2
Atz, J.W. and G.E. Pickford, 1959 The use of pituitary hormones in fish culture. Endeavour, 18:125-9
____1964, The pituitary gland and its relation to the reproduction of fishes in nature and in captivity. An annotated bibliography for the years 1956-1963. FAO Fish. Biol. Tech. Pap., (37):61 p.
Bage, G. et al., 1974 The pituitary gland of the roach Leuciscus rutilus. 2. The proximal pars distalis and its innervation. Acta Zool., 55:191-204
Bagenal, T.B., 1969 The relationship between food supply and fecundity in brown trout. J. Fish. Biol., 1:167-82
Baggerman, B., 1957 An experimental study on the timing of breeding and migration in the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus L.). Arch. Neerl. Zool., 12:105-318
____1972, Photoperiodic responses in the stickleback and their control by a daily rhythm of photosensitivity. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl., 3:466-76
Baker, B.I., P. Keshavanath and B.I. Sundararaj, 1974 The cell-types in the adenohypophysis of the Indian catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Cell Tissue Res., 148:347-58
Ball, J.N. and B.I. Baker, 1969 The pituitary gland: anatomy and histophysiology, In Fish physiology, edited by W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 2:1-110
Ball, J.N. et al., 1972 Investigations on hypothalamic control of adenohypophysial functions in teleost fish. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl. 3:11-21
Banerji, S.R., 1974 Hypophysation and life history of Channa punctatus (Bloch). J. Inland Fish. Soc. India, 6:62-73
Bardach, J.E., J.H. Ryther and W.O. McLarney, 1972 Aquaculture: the farming and husbandry of freshwater and marine organisms. New York, Wiley Interscience, 878 p.
Bargmann, W., 1966 Neurosecretion. Int. Rev. Cytol., 19:183-201
Barnabé, G., 1976 Rapport technique sur la ponte induite et l'élevage des larves du loup Dicentrarchus labrax (L.) et de la daurade Sparus aurata (L.). Stud. Rev. GFCM/ Stud. Rev. CGPM, 55:63-116
Barr, W.A., 1968 Patterns of ovarian activity. In Perspectives in endocrinology, edited by E.J.W. Barrington and C.B. Jorgensen. New York, Academic Press, pp. 164-238
Batten, T., J.N. Ball and M. Benjamin, 1975 Ultrastructure of the adenohypophysis in the teleost Poecilia latipinna. Cell Tissue Res., 161:239-61
Benson, B. et al., 1976 Differential localization of antigonadotrophic and vasotocic activities in bovine and rat pineal. Life Sci., 19:747-54
Bern, H. and G. Chieffi, 1968 Bibliography on the steroid hormones of fishes. Pubbl. Staz. Zool. Napoli, 36:287-320
Bern, H.A., R.S. Nishioka and Y. Nagahama, 1974 The relationship between nerve fibers and adenohypophysial cell types in the cichlid teleost Tilapia mossambica. Rech. Biol. Contemp., 1974; 179-94
Bhowmick, R.M., 1979 Observations on the use of human chorionic gonadotropin prepared in the laboratory in induced spawning in the major carp Labeo rohita. Paper presented at the Symposium on Inland Aquaculture, Barrackpore, India, Tech. Pap. (16)
Bhowmick, R.M. and M.M. Bagchi, 1971 A note on the preservation of sperms of carps. J. Inland Fish. Soc. India, 3:119-20
Bhowmick, R.M. and H. Chaudhuri, 1968 Preliminary observations on the use of trichloroacetic acid for extraction of gonadotropic hormones in induced spawning of carps. J. Zool. Soc. India, 60:48-54
Bhowmick, R.M. and G.V. Kowtal, 1973 Simplified technique of hypophysation of major carps. J. Inland Fish. Soc. India, 5:218-22
Bhowmick, R.M. et al., 1977 Experiments on second spawning of major Indian carps in the same season by hypohysation. Aquaculture, 12:149-55
____1979, Observations on the use of various hormones and clomiphene citrate in hypophysation of Indian major carps. Paper presented at the Symposium on Inland Aquaculture, Barrackpore, India, Tech. Pap. (14)
Bieniarz, K. et al., 1978 The annual reproduction cycle in adult carp in Poland: ovarian state and serum gonadotropin level. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:917-21
Billard, R., 1978a Testicular feed back on the hypothalamo-pituitary axis in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri R.). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:813-18
____1978b, Changes in structure and fertilizing ability of marine and freshwater fish spermatozoa diluted in media of various salinities. Aquaculture, 14:187-98
Billard, R. and B. Breton, 1978 Rhythms of reproduction in teleost fish. In Rhythmic activity of fishes, edited by J.E. Thorpe. London, Academic Press, pp. 31-53
Billard, R. and A.M. Escaffre, 1973 Effects of HCG and carp gonadotropin on the maintenance of spermatogenesis in hypophysectomized goldfish (Carassius auratus). Int. Res. Commun. Syst., 73:12-5
Billard, R. and B. Jalabert, 1974 L'insémination artificielle de la truite (Salmo gairdneri Richardson) (Artificial insemination of the trout (Salmo gairdneri Richardson). 2. Comparaison des effets de différents dilueurs sur la conservation de la fertilité des gamètes avant et après insémination. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 14:601-10
Billard, R. and R.E. Peter, 1977 Gonadotropin release after implantation of anti-estrogens in the pituitary and hypothalamus of goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 32:213-20
Billard, R., B. Breton and M.P. Dubois, 1971 Immunocytologie et histochimie des cellules gonadotropes et thyréotropes hypophysaires chez la carpe, Cyprinus carpio. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 272:981-3
Billard, R., E. Burzawa-Gérard and B. Breton, 1970 Régénération de la spermatogenèse du cyprin hypophysectomisé (Carassius auratus L.) par un facteur gonadotrope hautement purifié de carpe. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, (D), 271:1896-9
Billard, R., J. Dupont and G. Barnabé, 1977 Diminution de la motilité et de la durée de conservation du sperme de Dicentrarchus labrax L. (Poissons, Teleosteens) pendant la période de spermiation. (Fall in motility and survival time at low temperature of sperm of Dicentrarchus labrax L. (Pisces, Teleostei) during the spawning season). Aquaculture, 11:363-7
Billard, R. M. Richard and B. Breton, 1976 Stimulation de la sécretion gonadotrope hypophysaire après castration chez la Truite arc-en-ciel; variation de la response on cours du cycle reproducteur. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, (D), 283:171-74
____1977, Stimulation of gonadotropin secretion after castration in rainbow trout. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 33:163-5
Billard, R. et al., 1974 Artificial insemination in trout using a sperm diluant. In The early life history of fish, edited by J.H.S. Blaxter. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 715-23
____1978, Endocrine control of the teleost reproductive cycle and its relation to external factors: Salmonid and cyprinid models. In Comparative endocrinology, edited by P.J. Gaillard and H.H. Boer. Amsterdam, Elsevier-North Holland, Biomedical Press, pp. 37-48
Blanc-Livini, N., 1971 Ovarian histochemistry of the fishes Cyprinus carpio, Mugil capito and Tilapia aurea (Teleostei). Histochem. J., 3:405-14
Blanc-Livini, N. and M. Abraham, 1968 Evolution du pouvoir gonadotrope dans l'hypophyse de Cyprinus carpio et Mugil cephalus. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, (D), 267: 958-61
____1970, The influence of environmental salinity on the prolactin - and gonadotropin - secreting regions in the pituitary of Mugil (Teleostei). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 14;184-97
Blüm, V., 1972 The influence of ovine follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) on the male reproductive system and the skin of the Mediterranean blenniid fish Blennius sphinx (Valenciennes). J. Exp. Zool., 181:203-17
Boonbrahm, M., W. Tarnchalanukit and W. Chuapoehuk, 1970 Induced spawning by pituitary hormone injection of pond-reared fishes. Proc. IPFC, 13(2):162-70
Breton, B. and R. Billard, 1977 Effects of light and temperature on the plasma gonadotropin and spermatogenesis in the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 17:331-40
Breton, B. and C. Well, 1973 Effets du LH/FSH-RH synthetique et d'extraits hypothalamiques de Carpe sur la sécretion d'hormone gonadotrope in vivo chez la Carpe (Cyprinus carpio L.). C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, (D) 277:2061-4
Breton, B., B. Jalabert and A. Fostier, 1975 Induction de décharges gonadotropes hypophysaires chez la carpe (Cyprinus carpio) à l'aide du citrate de cisclomiphene. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 25;400-4
Breton, B., B. Jalabert and P. Reinaud, 1976 Purification of gonadotropin from rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri Richardson) pituitary glands. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 16:25-36
Breton, B., B. Jalabert and C. Weil, 1975 Caractérisation partielle d'un facteur hypothalamique de libération des hormones gonadotropes chez la Carpe (Cyprinus carpio). Étude in vitro. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 25:405-15
Breton, B., P. Prunet and P. Reinaud, 1978 Sexual differences in salmon gonadotropin. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:759-65
Breton, B. et al., 1971a Stimulation in vitro de la libération d'hormone gonadotrope hypophysaire par un facteur hypothalamique chez la Carpe Cyprinus carpio L. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 273:2591-4
____1971b, Dosage radioimmunologique d'une hormone gonadotrope de Carpe. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 272:1515-7
____1972a, Activité réciproque des facteurs hypothalamiques de Bélier (Ovis aries) et de poissons téléostéens sur la sécrétion in vitro des hormones gonadotropes c-HG et LH respectivement par des hypophyses de Carpe et de Bélier. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 274:2530-3
____1972b, Dosage radioimmunologique des gonadotropines plasmatiques chez Carassius auratus, au cours du nycthémère et pendant l'ovulation. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 18:463-8
Breucker, H. and E. Horstmann, 1965 Elektronenmikroskopische Untersuchungen am pinealorgan der Regenbogenforelle (Salmo irideus). Prog. Brain Res., 10:259-69
Bullough, W.S., 1939 A study of the reproductive cycle of the minnow in relation to the environment. Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond., 109A:79-102
____1951, Vertebrate sexual cycles. London, Methuen and Co., Ltd. 123 p.
____1959, Vertebrate photostimulation. In Photoperiodism and related phenomena in plants and animals, edited by R.B. Withrow. Publ. Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 55:641-9
Burzawa-Gérard, E., 1971 Purification d'une hormone gonadotrope hypophysaire de poisson téléostéen, la carpe (Cyprinus carpio L.). Biochimie, 53:545-52
____1974, Étude biologique et biochimique de l'hormone gonadotrope d'un poisson téléostéen, la Carpe (Cyprinus carpio L.). Mém. Mus. Natl. Hist. Nat. (A Zool.), 86:1-77
Burzawa-Gérard, E. and Y.A. Fontaine, 1965 Activités biologiques d'un facteur hypophysaire gonadotrope purifié de poisson téléostéen. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 5:87-95
____1976, Formation d'une molécule hybride douée d'une activité gonadotrope sur la grenouille à partir de la sous-unité a de l'hormone lutéinisante bovine et d'une sous-unité de l'hormone gonadotrope d'un poisson Téléostéen. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 282:97-100
Burzawa-Gérard, E. and B. Kerdelhué, 1978 Étude par radioimmunologie des propriétés des immunsérums de l'hormone gonadotrope de la Carpe (Cyprinus carpio L.) et de sous-unités. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:773-80
Burzawa-Gérard, E., S. Dufour and Y.A. Fontaine, 1980 Relations immunologiques entre les hormones glycoprotéiques hypophysaires de poissons et de mammifères ainsi qu'entre leurs sous-unités et B. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 41:199-211
Burzawa-Gérard, E., B.F. Goncharov and Y.A. Fontaine, 1975a L'hormone gonadotrope hypophysaire d'un poisson chondrostéen l'esturgeon (Acipenser stellatus Pall.). 1. Purification. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 27:289-95
____1975b, Further biochemical studies on carp gonadotropin (c-GTH), biochemical and biological comparison of c-GTH and a gonadotropin from Acipenser stellatus Pall. (Chondrostei). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 29:498-505
Callard, I.P. et al., 1978 Testicular regulation in non-mammalian vertebrates. Biol. Reprod., 18:16-43
Campbell, C.M., 1978 In vitro stimulation of vitellogenin incorporation into trout oocytes by salmon pituitary extracts. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1013-8
Campbell, C.M. and D.R. Idler, 1976 Hormonal control of vitellogenesis in hypophysectomized winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus Walbaum). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 28:143-50
____1977, Oocyte maturation and ovulation induced in hypophysectomized winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus) by preparations from pituitary glands of American plaice (Hippoglossoides platessoides). J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34:2151-5
____1980, Characterization of an estradiol-induced protein from rainbow trout serum as vitellogenin by the composition and radioimmunological cross reactivity to ovarian yolk fractions. Biol. Reprod., 22:605-17
Campbell, C.M., J.M. Walsh and D.R. Idler, 1976 Steroids in the plasma of the winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus Walbaum). A seasonal study and investigation of steroid involvement in oocyte maturation. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 29:14-20
Carlson, A.R. and A.G. Hale, 1973 Early maturation of brook trout in the laboratory. Prog. Fish-Cult., 35:150-3
Carreon, J.A., F.A. Estocapio and E.M. Enderez, 1976 Recommended procedures for induced spawning and fingerling production of Clarias macrocephalus Gunther. Aquaculture, 8:269-81
Chan, S.T.H. and J.G. Phillips, 1969 The biosynthesis of steroids by the gonads of ricefield eel Monopterus albus at various phases during natural sex reversal. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 12:619-36
Chao, N-H., H-P. Chen and I-C. Liao, 1975 Study on cryogenic preservation of grey mullet sperm. Aquaculture, 5:389-406
Chaudhuri, H., 1963 Induced spawning of Indian carps. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. India (B Biol. Sci.), 29:478-87
____1968, Breeding and selection of cultivated warmwater fishes in Asia and the Far East a review. FAO Fish. Rep., (44) vol. 4:30-66
____1969, Methods adopted for inducing breeding of fishes. Paper presented at the FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Induced Breeding of Cultivated Fishes. Barrackpore, Cuttack and Bombay, India. 15 July - 18 August 1969. Rome, FAO, FRI/IBCF/8:16 p.
____1976, Use of hormones in induced spawning carps. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33:940-7
Chaudhuri, H. and K.H. Alikunhi, 1957 Observations on the spawning of Indian carps by hormone injection. Curr. Sci., 26:381-2
Chaudhuri, H. and S.D. Tripathi, 1979 Problems of warmwater fish seed production. In Advances in aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, published by Fishing News (Books) Ltd. for FAO, pp. 127-34
Chaudhuri, H., S.B. Singh and K.K. Sukumaran, Experiments on large-scale production of fish 1966 seed of the Chinese grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idellus (C. and V.) and the silver carp Hypophthalmichthys molitrix (C. and V.) by induced breeding in ponds in India. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (B), 63:80-95
Chen, F.Y., M. Chow and B.K. Sin, 1969 Induced spawning of the three major Chinese carps in Malacca, Malaysia. Malay. Agric. J., 47:24-38
Chen, F.Y. et al., 1977 Artificial spawning and larval rearing of the grouper Epinephelus tauvina (Forskal) in Singapore. Singapore J. Primary Ind., 5:1-21
Christensen, A.K., 1975 Leydig cells. In Handbook of physiology Sect. 7 Vol. 5. Washington; American Physiology Society
Clemens, H.P., 1968 A review of selection and breeding in culture of warm food fishes in North America. FAO Fish. Rep., (44) vol. 4:67-80
Clemens, H.P. and F.B. Grant, 1964 Gonadal hydration of carp (Cyprinus carpio) and goldfish (Carassius auratus) after injections of pituitary extracts. Zoologica, N.Y., 49:193-210
____1965, The seminal thinning response of the carp (Cyprinus carpio) and rainbow trout (Salmo gairdnerii) after injections of pituitary extracts. Copeia, 1965:174-7
Clemens, H.P. and T. Inslee, 1968 The production of unisexual broods of Tilapia mossambica sex reversed with methyltestosterone. Trans. Am. Fish Soc., 97:18-21
Clemens, H.P. and K.E. Sneed, 1962 Bioassay and use of pituitary materials to spawn warm-water fishes. Res. Rep. U.S. Fish Wildl. Serv., (61):30 p
Clemens, H.P. et al., 1964 Partial characterization of the gonadal hydration principle in the pituitary of carp. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 4:503-7
Colombo, L. and P. Colombo Belvedere, 1975 Gonadal location of the enzymes steroid 11ß-and 21-hydroxylases. Boll. Zool., 42:263-9
____1976, Gonadal steroidogenesis in Echinoderms. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 29:255-6
____1977, Gonadal steroidogenesis in teleost fishes. Invest. Pesq., Bare., 41:147-64
Colombo, L., P. Colombo Belvedere and A. Marconato, 1979 Biochemical and functional aspects of gonadal biosynthesis of steroid hormones in teleost fishes. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci,), 45:443-51
Colombo, L., P. Colombo Belvedere and A. Pilati, 1977 Biosynthesis of free and conjugated 5ß- reduced androgens by the testis of the black goby, Gobius jozo L. Boll. Zool., 44:131-4
Colombo, L., E. Del Conte and P. Clemenze, 1972 Steroid biosynthesis in vitro by gonads of Sparus auratus L. (Teleostei) at different stages during natural sex reversal. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 19:26-36
Colombo, L., C. Lupo di Prisco and G. Binder, 1970 Metabolism of pregnenolone-4-^14C by the testis of Gobius paganellus (Teleostei). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 15:404-19
Colombo, L., S. Pesavento and D.W. Johnson, 1972 Patterns of steroid metabolism in teleost and ganoid fishes. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl. 3:245-53
Colombo, L. et al., 1973 Biosynthesis of 11-deoxycorticosteroids by teleost ovaries and discussion of their possible role in oocyte maturation and ovulation. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 21:168-78
Cook, A.F. and R.E. Peter, 1980 The effect of temperature on the clearance of intraperitoneally injected gonadotropin in the goldfish Carassius auratus. Aquaculture, 19:275-85
Cook, H. and A.P. van Overbeeke, 1972 Ultrastructure of pituitary gland (pars distalis) in sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) during gonad maturation. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 130:338-50
Cook, A.F., N.E. Stacey and R.E. Peter, 1980 Preovulatory changes in serum cortisol levels in the goldfish Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 40;507-10
Cooperative Team for Hormonal Application in Pisciculture, 1977 A new highly effective ovulating agent for fish reproduction. Scient. Sin., 20:469-74
Coutant, C.C., 1977 Compilation of temperature preference data. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34:739-45
Crim, J.W., W.W. Dickhoff and A. Gorbman, 1978 Comparative endocrinology of piscine hypothalamic hypophysiotropic peptides: Distribution and activity. Am. Zool., 18:411-24
Crim, L.W. and D.M. Cluett, 1974 Elevation of plasma gonadotropin concentration in response to mammalian gonadotropin releasing hormone (GRH) treatment of the male brown trout as determined by radioimmunoassay. Endocrinol. Res. Commun., 1:101-10
Crim, L.W. and D.M. Evans, 1979 Stimulation of pituitary gonadotropin by testosterone in juvenile rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 37:192-6
____1980, LH-RH-stimulated gonadotropin release from the rainbow trout pituitary gland: an in vitro assay for detection of teleost gonadotropin releasing factor(s). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 40:283-90
Crim, L.W, and D.R. Idler, 1978 Plasma gonadotropin, estradiol and vitellogenin and gonad phosvitin levels in relation to the seasonal reproductive cycles of female brown trout. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1001-5
Crim, L.W. and R.E. Peter, 1978 The influence of testosterone implantation in the brain and pituitary on pituitary gonadotropin levels in Atlantic salmon parr. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:689-94
Crim, L.W., R.K. Meyer and E.M. Donaldson, 1973 Radioimmunoassay estimates of plasma gonadotropin levels in spawning pink salmon. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 21:69-76
Crim, L.W., R.E. Peter and R. Billard, 1976 Stimulation of gonadotropin secretion by intraventricular injection of hypothalamic extracts in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 30:77-82
Crim, L.W., E.G. Watts and D.M. Evans, 1975 The plasma gonadotropin profile during sexual maturation in a variety of salmonid fishes. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 27:62-70
Dadzie, S., 1973 Effects of exogenous hormones on the pituitary gonadotrophic activity in Tilapia previously treated with a dithiocarbomoylhydrazine derivative (I.C.1. 33, 82) Ghana. J. Sci., 13:20-34
Das, S.M. and H.A. Khan, 1962 The pituitary and pisciculture in India with an account of the pituitary of some Indian fishes and review of techniques and literature on the subject. Icthyologica, 1:43-58
Davenport, J., O. Vahl and S. Lönning, 1979 Cold resistance in the eggs of the capelin Mallotus villosus. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K., 59:443-53
Deery, D.J., 1974 Determination by radioimmunoassay of the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) content of the hypothalamus of the rat and some lower vertebrates. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 24:280-5
Delahunty, G., C.B. Schreck and V.L. de Vlaming, 1977 Effect on pinealectomy, reproductive statue, feeding regime, and photoperiod on plasma cortisol in goldfish. Am. Zool., 17:873
Delahunty, G. et al., 1978 Effects of pinealectomy and melatonin treatment on liver and plasma metabolites in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 35:99-109
de Montalembert, G., B. Jalabert and C. Bry, 1978 Precocious induction of maturation and ovulation in northern pike (Esox lucius) Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:969-75
Dettlaff, T.A. and S.I. Davydova, 1974 Effect of triiodothyronine on ripening of oocytes in stellate sturgeon after action of low temperatures and reservation of females, Sov. J. Dev. Biol., 5:402-9
____1979, Differential sensitivity of cells of follicular epithelium and oocytes in the stellate sturgeon to unfavourable conditions, and correlating influence of triiodothyronine. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 39:236-43
Devaraj, K.V., T.J. Varghese and G.P. Satyanarayana Rao, 1972 Induced breeding of the freshwater catfish Clarias batrachus (Linn.) by using pituitary glands from marine catfish. Curr. Sci., 41:868-70
de Vlaming, V.L., 1972 Environmental control of teleost reproductive cycles: a brief review. J. Fish Biol., 4:131-40
____1972b, The effects of temperature and photoperiod on reproductive cycling in the estuarine gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis. Fish. Bull. NOAA/NMFS, 70:1137-52
____1974, Environmental and endocrine control of teleost reproduction. In Control, of sex in fishes, edited by C.B. Schreck. Blacksburg, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, pp. 13-83
____1975, Effect of pinealectomy on gonadal activity in the cyprinid teleost, Notemigonus crysoleucas. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 26:36-49
____1975b, Effects of photoperiod and temperature on gonadal activity in the cyprinid teleost, Notemigonus crysoleucas. Biol. Bull. Mar. Biol. Lab. Woods Hole, 148:402-15
de Vlaming, V.L. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1972 Endocrine influences on seminal vesicles in the estuarine gobiid fish. Gillichthys mirabilis. Biol. Bull. Mar. Biol. Lab. Woods Hole, 142:243-50.
de Vlaming, V.L. and M.J. Vodicnik, 1975 Effects of photoperiod-temperature regimes on pituitary gonadotrophs, pituitary gonadotropin potency and hypothalamic gonadotropin releasing activity in the teleost Notemigonus crysoleucas. J. Therm. Biol., 1:119-25 '
____1977, Diurnal variations in pituitary gonadotropin content and in gonadal response to exogenous gonadotropin and prolactin in Notemigonus crysoleucas. J. Fish Biol., 10:371-83
____1978, Seasonal effects of pinealectomy on gonadal activity in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Biol. Reprod., 19:57-63
de Vlaming, V.L., M. Sage and C.B. Charlton, 1974 The effect of melatonin treatment on gonosomatic index in the teleost Fundulus smilis and the tree frog, Hyla cinerea. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 22;433-8
de Vlaming, V.L. et al., 1979 The effect of pinealectomy on serum K^+ and Cl^- levels in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 37:131-3
Dipper, F.A. and R.S.V. Pullin, 1979 Gonochorism and sex. inversion in British Labridae. J. Zool. Lond., 187:97-112:
Dixit, V.P., 1970 Neurosecretion and feed back mechanism in Clarias batrachus Linn.: Ovariectomy and administration of exogenous sex hormones. Cellule, 68:213-21
Dodd, J.M., 1960 Gonadal and gonadotrophic, hormones in- lower vertebrates. In Marshall's physiology of reproduction, edited by A.S. Parkes. London, Longman Green, vol. 1, Pt. 2:417-582
____1972, The endocrine regulation of gametogenesis and gonad maturation in fishes. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. Suppl. 3:675-87
____1975, The hormones of sex and reproduction and their effects in fish and lower chordates: twenty years on. Am. Zool., 15: Suppl. 1:137-171
Dodd, J.M., B.K. Follett and P.J. Sharp, 1971 Hypothalamic control, of pituitary function in submammalian vertebrates. In Advances in comparative physiology and biochemistry, edited by O. Lowenstein. New York, Academic Press, vol. 4:113-223
Dodt, E., 1963 Photosensitivity of the pineal organ in the teleost Salmo irideus. Experientia, 19:642-3
Doerr-Schott, J., 1976 Immunohistochemical detection by light and electron microscopy of pituitary hormones in cold-blooded vertebrates. 1. Fish and amphibians. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 28:487-512
Donaldson, E.M., 1973 Reproductive endocrinology of fishes. Am. Zool., 13:909-27
Donaldson, E.M. and Z.H. Shehadeh, 1972 Effect of salmon gonadotropin on ovarian and testicular development in immature grey mullet Mugil cephalus. In The grey mullet, induced breeding and larval rearing, Waimanalo, Hawaii, Oceanic Institute, Report No. 01-72-76-1:71-86
Donaldson, E.M., G. Hunter and H.M. Dye, 1978 Induced ovulation in the coho salmon (Onchorhynchus kisutch) using salmon pituitary preparations, gonadotropin releasing hormones and an antiestrogen. Paper presented to the Western. Regional Conference on General Comparative Endocrinology, Santa Cruz, (Abstr. 24)
____1979, Relative potency of gonadotropin releasing hormone and gonadotropin releasing hormone analogues for induced ovulation in the coho salmon (Onchorhynchus kisutch) Paper presented to the Western Regional Conference on General and Comparative Endocrinology, Eugene, Oregon (Abstr.)
Donaldson, E.M. et al. 1972a Fertilization of pink salmon (Onchorhynchus gorbuscha) ova by spermatozoa from gonadotropin injected juveniles. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 29:13-8
____1972b, Preparation of gonadotropin from. salmon (Onchorhynchus tshawytscha) pituitary glands. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 18:469-81
Dubey, G.P. and R.P. Tuli, 1961 Observations on the breeding of major carps in Madhya Pradesh. J. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc., 58:81-91
Dubois, M.P., R. Billard and B. Breton, 1978 Use of immunofluorescence for localization of somatostatin-like antigen in the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Comparative distribution of LH-RF and neurophysin. Ann., Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:843-50
Ebels, I., 1976 Isolation of avian and mammalian pineal indoles and antigonadotropic factors. Am. Zool., 16:5-15
Eckstein, B. and U. Eylath, 1970 The occurrence and biosynthesis in vitro of 11-ketotestosterone in ovarian tissue of the mullet, Mugil capito, derived from two biotopes. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 14:396-403
Eckstein, B. and Y. Katz, 1971 Steroidogenesis in post- and pre-spawned ovaries of a Cichlid fish, Tilapia aurea. Comp. Biochem. Physiol.,(A Comp. Physiol.), 39:329-38
Egami, N. and K. Hosokowa, 1973 Response of the gonads to environmental changes in the fish, Oryzias latipes. In Responses of fish to environmental changes, edited by W. Chavin. Springfield, Illinois, Charles C. Thomas, pp. 279-301
Ekengren, B. and M. Terlou, 1978 Hypothalamic centres and innervation of the hypophysis in the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:837-42
Ekengren, B., J. Peute and G, Fridberg, 1978 The distribution and the nature of the gonadotropic cells in the rostral pars distalis of the Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:799-804
Eleftheriou, B.E., K.W. Böehlke and O.W. Tiemeier, 1966 Free plasma estrogens in the channel catfish. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 121:85-8
Emmersen, B.K. and I.M. Petersen, 1976 Natural occurrence and experimental induction by estradiol-17ß of a lipophosphoprotein (vitellogenin) in flounder (Platichthys flesus L.) Comp. Biochem. Physiol., (B Comp. Biochem.), 54:443-6
Erdahl, D.A. and E.F. Graham, 1978 Cryopreservation of salmonid spermatozoa. Cryobiology, 15:362-4
Eversole, W.J., 1941 Effects of pregneninolone and related steroids on sexual development in fish (Lebistes reticulatus). Endocrinology, 28:603-10
Falck, B. et al., 1962 Fluorescence, of catecholamines and related compounds condensed with formaldehyde. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 10:348-54
Farmer, S.W. and H. Papkoff, 1977 A teleost (Tilapia mossambica) gonadotropin that resembles luteinizing hormone. Life Sci., 20:1227-32
Fenwick, J.C., 1970a The pineal organ. In Fish physiology, edited by W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 4:91-108
____1970b, Demonstration and effect of melatonin in fish. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 14:84-97
____1970c, The pineal organ: Photoperiod and reproductive cycles in the goldfish, Carassius auratus L. J. Endocrinol., 46:101-11
____1970d, Effects of pinealectomy and bilateral en-ideation on the phototactic response and the conditioned response to light of the goldfish, Carassius auratus L. Can. J. Zool., 48:175-82
Fish Reproductive Physiology Research Group and Peptide Hormone Group, 1978 Radioimmunoassay of serum gonadotropin of carp (Cyprinus carpio L.). Acta Biochem. Biophys. Sin., 10:399-407
Fishelson L, 1966 Cichlidae of the genus Tilapia in Israel. Bamidgeh, 18:67-80
Follénius E., 1963 Ultrastructure des types cellulaires de l'hypophyse de quelques poissons téléostéens. Arch. Anat. Microsc. Morphol. Exp., 52:429-68
____1965, Bases structurales et ultrastructurales des corrélations hypothalamo-hypophysaires chez quelques espèces de poissons téléostéens. Ann. Sci. Nat. (B Zool.), 7:1-150
Follénius, E. and M.P. Dubois, 1977 Localisation inanunocytologique de peptides analogues a 1'a -endorphine dans certains neurones du noyau latéral du tuber de Carassius auratus L. et Cyprinus carpio L. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 285:1065-8
Follénius, E., J. Doerr-Schott and M.P. Dubois, 1978 Immunocytology of pituitary cells from teleost fishes. Int. Rev. Cytol., 54:193-223
Fontaine, M., 1976 Hormones and the control of reproduction in aquaculture. J. Fish. Res. Board Can,. 33:922-39
Fontaine, M. and M, Chauvel, 1961 Evaluation du pouvoir gonadotrope de l'hypophyse des poissons téléostéens et en particulier de Salmo salar L. à diverses étapes de son développement et de ses migrations. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 252:822-4
Fontaine, At. and M. Olivereau, 1975 Some aspects of the organization and evolution of the vertebrate pituitary. Am. Zool.v 15 Suppl. 1:61-79
Fontaine, Y.A., 1975 Hormones in fishes. In Biochemical and biophysical perspectives in marine biology, edited by D.C. Malins and J.R. Sargent. New York, Academic Press, vol. 2:139-212
____1980, Les hormones gonadotropes de l'hypophyse: biochime et biologic comparées; specificité et evolution. Reprod. Nutr. Dév., 1980:381-418
Fontaine, Y.A. and E. Burzawa-Gérard, 1978 Biochemical and biological properties of fish gonadotropins and their subunits: comparison with mammalian hormones. In Structure and function of gonadotropins, edited by K.W. McKerns. New York, Plenum Press, pp. 361-80
Fontaine, Y.A., E. Burzawa-Gérard and M. Delerue-LeBelle, 1970 Stimulation hormonale de activité adénylcyclasique de l'ovarie d'un poisson téléostéen le cyprin (Carassius auratus L.) C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 271:780-3
Fontenele, O. 1955 Injecting pituitary (hypophyseal) hormones into fish to induce spawning. Prog. Fish-Cult., 17:71-5
Fostier, A., B. Jalabert and M. Terqui, 1973 Action prédominance d'un dérivé hydroxyle de la progestérone sur la maturation in vitro des ovocytes de la truite arc-en-ciel, Salmo gairdneri. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D). 277:421-4
Fostier, A. et al., 1978 Plasma estradiol-17ß and gonadotropin during ovulation in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri R.). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:929-36
Fridberg, G. and B. Ekengren, 1977 The vascularization and the neuroendocrine pathways of the pituitary gland in the Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Can. J. Zool., 55:1284-96
Fujiya, M., 1979 Coastal culture of yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata) and red seabream (Pagrus major) in Japan, In Advances in Aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News (Books)Ltd., for FAO, pp. 453-66
Fuckien-Kiangsu-Chekiang-Shanghai Cooperative Group for Artificial Reproduction of Freshwater Economic Fishes, 1977 A further investigation on the stimulatory effect of a synthetic analogue of hypothalamic luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LRH-A) on spawning in "domestic fishes". Acta Biochem. Biophys. Sinica, 9:15-24
Funk, J.D. and E.M. Donaldson, 1972 Induction of precocious sexual maturity in male pink salmon (Onchorchynchus gorbuscha). Can. J. Zool., 50:1413-9
Gall, G.A.E., 1974 Influence of size of eggs and age of female on hatchability and growth in rainbow trout. Calif. Fish Game, 60:16-35
Gerbil'skii, N.L., 1938 L'influence de l'agent gonadotrope de l'hypophyse sur l'état de la fraieson chez l'Acipenser stellatus. C.R. Acad. Sci. URSS, 19:333-6
____1950, Biological groups of the kura sturgeon (Acipenser güldenstädti persicus Borodin) and measures for its reproduction in plants. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 71:785-8
Gern, W.A., D.W. Owens and C.L. Ralph, 1978a Plasma melatonin in the trout: Day night changes demonstrated by radioimmunoassay. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 34:453-8
____1978b, The synthesis of melatonin by the trout retina. J. Exp. Zool., 206:263-70
Gillet, C., R. Billard and B. Breton, 1977 Effets de la température sur le taux de gonadotropine plasmatique et la spermatogenèse du poisson rouge Carassius auratus. Can. J. Zool., 55:242-5
____1978, Seasonal effects of exposure to temperature and photoperiod regimes on gonad growth and plasma gonadotropin in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1045-49
Goetz, F.W., 1979 The role of steroids in the control of oocyte final maturation and ovulation in yellow perch (Perca flavescens). Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), B45:497-504
Goetz, F.W. and H.L. Bergman, 1978a The effects of steroids on final maturation and ovulation of oocytes from brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and yellow perch (Perca flavescens). Biol. Reprod., 18:293-8
____1978b, The in vitro effects of mammalian and piscine gonadotropin and pituitary preparations on final maturation in yellow perch (Perca flavescens) and walleye (Stizostedion vitreum). Can. J. Zool., 56:348-50
Goetz, F.W. and G. Theofan, 1979 In vitro stimulation of germinal vesicle breakdown and ovulation of yellow perch (Perca flavescens) oocytes. Effects of 17a -hydroxy-20ß-dihydro-progesterone and prostaglandins. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 37:273-85
Goos, H.J.T., 1978 Hypophysiotropic centres in the brain of amphibians and fish. Am. Zool., 18:401-10
Goos, H.J.T. and O. Murathanoglu, 1977 Localization of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GRH) in the forebrain and neurohypophysis of the trout (Salmo gairdneri). Cell. Tissue Res., 181:163-8
Goos, H.J.T. and P.G.W.J. van Oordt, 1978 Immunohistochemical cross-reaction of anti-mammalian LH-RH in lower vertebrates, Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:857-61
Gordin, H. and Y. Zohar, 1978 Induced spawning of Sparus auratus (L.) by means of hormonal treatment. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:985-90
Goryczko, K., 1972 A change of the spawning season in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri Richardson). Rocz. Nauk Roln., 94 (H-1):57-68
Goswami, S.V. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1968a Compensatory hypertrophy of the remaining ovary after unilateral ovariectomy at various phases of the reproductive cycle of catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 11:401-13
____1968b, Effects of estradiol benzoate, human chorionic gonadotropin, and follicle-stimulating hormone on unilateral ovariectomy-induced compensatory hypertrophy in catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 11:393-400
____1971a, In vitro maturation and ovulation of oocytes of the Catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch): Effects of mammalian hypophyseal hormones, catfish pituitary homogenate, steroid precursors and metabolites, and gonadal and adrenocortical steroids. J. Exp. Zool., 178;467-78
____1971b, Temporal effects of ovine luteinizing hormone and desoxycorticosterone acetate on maturation and ovulation of oocytes of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch): an in vivo and in vitro study. J. Exp. Zool., 178:457-66
____1973, Effects of actinomycin D, mitomycin C, puromycin, and cycloheximide on desoxycorticosterone-induced in vitro maturation in oocytes of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 185:327-32
____1974, Effects of C[18], C[19] and C[21] steroids on in vitro maturation of oocytes of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 23:282-5
Goswami, S.V., B.I. Sundararaj and E.M. Donaldson, 1974 In vitro maturation response of oocytes of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) to salmon gonadotropin in ovary-head kidney co-culture. Can. J. Zool., 52:745-8
Grant, F.D., P.K.T. Pang and R.W. Griffith, 1969 The twenty four-hour seminal hydration response in goldfish (Carassius auratus). 1. Sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, chloride and osmalality of serum and seminal fluid. Comp. Biochem. Physiol., 30:273-80
Guerrero, R.D, III, 1975 Use of oral androgens for the production of all-male Tilapia aurea (Steindachner). Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 104:342-8
____1979, Culture of male Tilapia mossambica produced through artificial sex reversal. In Advances in Aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill, Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., for FAO, pp. 166-8
Guest, W.C., J.W. Avault Jr. and J.D. Roussel, 1976 Preservation of channel catfish sperm. Trans. Am. Fish Soc., 105;469-74
Gupta, S., 1975 The development of carp gonads in warm water aquaria. J. Fish Biol., 7:775-82
Guraya, S.S., 1976a Recent advances in the morphology, hiscochemistry, and biochemistry of steroid-synthesizing cellular sites in non-mammalian vertebrate ovary. Int. Rev. Cytol., 44:365-409
____1976b, Recent advances in the morphology, histochemistry, and biochemistry of steroid-synthesizing cellular sites in the testes of non-mammalian vertebrates. Int. Rev. Cytol., 47:99-136
____1979, Recent advances in the morphology and histochemistry of steroid-synthesizing cellular sites in the gonads of fish. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:452-61
Hafeez, M.A., 1971 Light microscopic studies on the pineal organ in teleost fishes with special regard to its function. J. Morphol., 134:281-314
Hafeez, M.A. and P. Ford, 1967 Histology and histochemistry of the pineal organ in the sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka Walbum. Can. J. Zool., 45:117-28
Hafeez, M.A., H.H. Wagner and W.B. Quay, 1978 Mediation of light induced changes in pineal receptor and supporting cell nuclei and nucleoli in steelhead trout, Salmo gairdneri, Biochem. Photobiol., 28:213-8
Haider, S.G. and V. Blüm, 1977 On the evolution of pituitary gonadotropin system in lower vertebrates. Invest. Pesq., Bare., 41:185-204
Haider, S. and A.G. Sathynesan, 1972a The. nucleus lateralis tuberis of the freshwater teleost Heteropneustes fossilis (B1.). Acta Anat., 82:75-84
____1972b, Comparative study of the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial complex in some Indian freshwater teleost. Acta Anat., 81:202-24
Hara, A. and H. Hirai, 1978 Comparative studies on immunochemical properties of female-specific serum protein and egg yolk proteins in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (B Comp. Biochem.), 59:339-43
Hara, A., K. Yamauchi and H. Hirai, 1980 Studies on female-specific serum protein (vitellogenin) and egg yolk protein in Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica). Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (B Comp. Biochem.), 65:315-20
Harrington, R.W., 1957 Sexual photoperiodicity of the cyprinid fish, Notropis bifrenatus (Cope), in relation to the phases of its annual reproductive cycle. J. Exp. Zool., 135:529-56
____1959, Effects of four combinations of temperature and daylength on the ovogenetic cycle of a low-latitude fish, Fundulus conflueutus Goode and Bean. Zoologica, N.Y., 44:149-68
Harvey, B.J. and M.S. Hoar, 1979 The theory and practice of induced breeding in fish. Ottawa, Canada, International Development Research Centre, IDRC-TS21e:48 p.
Hasler, A.D., R.K. Meyer and H.M. Field, 1939 Spawning induced prematurely in trout with the aid of pituitary glands of the carp. Endocrinology, 25:978-83
Hattingh, J. and P.J. du Toit, 1973 Partial separation of the pituitary proteins of Labeo umbratus. Smith (mudfish). J. Fish. Biol., 5:41-7
Henderson, N.E., 1963 Influence of light and temperature on the reproductive cycle of the eastern brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis (Mitchell). J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 20:859-97
Hickling, C.F., 1968 The farming of fish. New York, Pergamon Press, 88 p.
Hines, R. and A. Yashouv, 1971 Some environmental factors influencing the activity of spermatozoa of Mugil capito Cuvier, a grey mullet, J. Fish Biol., 3:123-27
Hirose, K., 1971 Biological study on ovulation in vitro of fish. 1. Effects of pituitary and chorionic gonadotropins on ovulation in vitro of medaka Oryzias latipes. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 37:585-91
____1972a, Biological study on ovulation in vitro of fish. 4. Induction of in vitro ovulation of Oryzias latipes oocyte using steroids. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 38:457-61
____1972b, Biological study on ovulation in vitro of fish. 5. Induction of in vitro ovulation in Oryzias latipes oocytes removed from their follicular tissues. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 38:1091-6
____1973, Biological study on ovulation in vitro of fish. 6. Effects of metopirone (SU-4885) on salmon gonadotropin - and cortisol - induced in vitro ovulation in Oryzias latipes. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 39:765-9
____1976, Endocrine control of ovulation in medaka (Oryzias latipes) and ayu (Plecoglossus altivelis). J. Fish Res. Board Can., 33:989-94
Hirose, K. and R. Ishida, 1974 Induction of ovulation in the ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis, with LH-releasing hormone (LH-RH). Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 40:1235-40
Hirose, K. et al., 1975 In vitro biconversions of steroids in the mature ovary of the hagfish, Eptatretus burgeri. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (B Comp. Biochem.), 51:403-8
Hoar, W.S., 1969 Reproduction. In Fish physiology, edited by W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 3:1-72
Hoar, W.S. and Y. Nagahama, 1978 The cellular sources of sex steroids in teleost gonads. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:893-8
Hogendoorn, H., 1979 Controlled propagation of the African catfish, Clarias lazera (C. and V.). 1. Reproductive biology and field experiments. Aquaculture, 17:323-33
Holder, F.C. et al., 1979 A preliminary comparative immunohistochemical, radio immune logical, and biological study of arginine vasotocin (AVT) in the pineal gland and urophysis of some teleostei. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 37:15-25
Holmes, R.L. and J.N. Ball, 1974 The pituitary gland: a comparative account. In Biological structure and function, edited by R.J. Harrison, R.M.H. McMinn and J.E. Threherne, London, Cambridge University Press, vol. 4:1-397
Holmgren, U., 1959 On the structure of the pineal area of teleost fishes, with special reference to a few deep sea fishes. Göteb. K. Vetensk. - Vitterhetssamh. Handl., 8:1-66
____1965, On the ontogeny of the pineal and parapineal organs in teleost fishes. Prog. Brain Res., 10:172-82
Hontela, A. and R.E. Peter, 1978 Daily cycles in serum gonadotropin levels in the goldfish: Carassius auratus, effects of photoperiod., temperature, and sexual condition. Can .J. Zool., 56:2430-42
Hontela, A. and R.E. Peter, 1980 Effects of pinealectomy, blinding, and sexual condition on serum gonadotropin levels in the goldfish. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 40:168-79
Hopkins, K.D., W.L. Shelton and C.R, Engle, 1979 Estrogen sex reversal of Tilapia aurea. Aquaculture, 18:263-8
Horton, H.G. and A.G. Ott, 1976 Cryopreservation of fish spermatozoa and ova. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33:995-1000
Houssay, B.A., 1931 Action sexuelle de l'hypophyse sur les poissons et les reptiles. C.R. Soc. Biol. Paris, 106:377-8
Htun-han, M., 1977 The effects of photoperiod on reproduction in fishes: an annotated bibliography. Libr. Inf. Leafl. Minist. Agric. Fish. Food G.B., (6):30 p.
Hubbs, C. and K. Strawn, 1957 The effects of light and temperature on the fecundity of the green throat darter, Etheostoma lepidum. Ecology, 38:596-602
Hulata, G. and S. Rothbard, 1979 Cold storage of carp semen for short periods. Aquaculture, 16:267-69
Hulata, G., R. Moav and G. Wohlfarth, 1974 The relationship of gonad and egg size to weight and age in the European and Chinese races of the common carp, Cyprinus carpio L. J. Fish Biol., 6:745-58
Hurlburt, M.E., 1977 Role of the thyroid gland in ovarian maturation of the goldfish, Carassius auratus L. Can. J. Zool., 55:1906-13
Hyder, M., 1970 Gonadal and reproductive patterns in Tilapia leucosticta (Teleostei: Cichlidae) in an equatorial lake. Lake Naivasha, Kenya. J. Zool., Lond., 162:179-95
____1972, Endocrine regulation of reproduction in Tilapia Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 3:729-40
Hyder, M. A.V. Shah and A.S. Hartree, 1979 Methallibure studies on Tilapia. 3. Effects of tilapian partially purified pituitary gonadotrophic fractions on the testes of methallibure-treated Sarotherodon spirulus (= Tilapia nigra). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 39:475-80
Hyder, M., A.V. Shah and M.A. Kirschner, 1970 Effect of choripnic gonadotropin on testicular histology and testosterone production in Tilapia leucosticta (Teleostei: Cichlidae). Endocrinology, 87:819-22
Ibrahim, K.H., 1969a Techniques of collection, processing and storage of fish pituitary glands. Paper presented at the FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Induced Spawning of Cultivated Fishes, Barrackpore, Cuttack and Bombay, India, 15 July - 18 August 1969. Rome, FAO, 13 p. (mimeo)
____1969b, Preparation, preservation and ampouling of fish pituitary extract. Paper presented at the FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Induced Spawning of Cultivated Fishes, Barrackpore, Cuttack and Bombay, India, 15 July - 18 August 1969, Rome, FAO, 12 p.
Idler, D.R. and C.M. Campbell, 1980 Gonadotropin stimulation of estrogen and yolk precursor synthesis in juvenile rainbow trout. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 41:384-91
Idler, D.R. and S.J. Hwang, 1978 Conditions for optimizing recovery of salmon gonadotropin activity from ConA Sepharose. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 34:642-4
Idler, D.R. and H.C. Macnab, 1967 The biosynthesis of 11-ketotestosterone and 11-hydroxytestosterone by Atlantic salmon tissues in vitro. Can. J. Biochem., 45:211-8
Idler, D.R. and T.B. Ng, 1979 Studies on two types of gonadotropins from both salmon and carp pituitaries. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 38;421-40
Idler, D.R., L.S. Bazar and S.J. Hwang, 1975a Fish gonadotropin(s). 2. Isolation of gonadotropin(s) from chum salmon pituitary glands using affinity chromatography. Endocrine. Res. Commun., 2:215-35
____1975b, Fish gonadotropin(s). 3. Evidence for more than one gonadotropin in chum salmon pituitary glands. Endocrine Res. Commun., 2:237-49
Idler, D.R. S.J. Hwang and L.S. Bazar, 1975 Fish gonadotropin(s). 1. Bioassay of salmon gonadotropin(s) in vitro with immature trout gonads. Endocrine Res. Commun., 2:199-213 '
Idler, D.R., S.J. Hwang and L.W. Crim, 1979 Quantification of vitellogenin in Atlantic salmon plasma by radioimmunoassay. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 36:574-8
Idler, D.R., P.J. Schmidt and A.P. Ronald, 1960 Isolation and identification of 11-ketotestosterone in salmon plasma. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol., 38:1053-8
Idler, D.R., B. Truscott and H.C. Stewart, 1968 Some distinctive aspects of steroidogenesis in fish. Excerpta Med. Found. Int. Congr. Ser., (184):724-9
Ishida, R., K. Hirose and E.M. Donaldson, 1972 Induction of ovulation in ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis, with salmon pituitary gonadotropin. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 38:1007-12
Ito, Y. et al., 1966 Phosvitin of the trout roe. J. Biol. Chem., 60;726-8
Iwamatsu, T., 1978 Studies oocyte maturation of the medaka, Oryzias latipes. 5. On the structure of steroids that induce maturation in vitro, J. Exp. Zool., 204:401-8
Iwamatsu, T. and T. Katoh, 1978 Maturation in vitro of oocytes of the loach, Misgurnus anguillicaudatus by steroid hormones and gonadotropins. Annot. Zool. Japon., 51:79-89
Jackson, I.M.D., 1978 Phylogenetic distribution and function of the hypophysiotropic hormones of the hypothalamus. Am. Zool., 18:385-99
Jalabert, B., 1975 Modulation par différents stérions non maturants de l'efficacité de la 17a -hydroxy 20ß-dihydroprogesterone ou d'un extrait gonadotrope sur la maturation intrafolliculoire in vitro des ovocytes de la Truite arc-en-ciel Salmo gairdneri. C. R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 281:811-4
____1976, In vitro oocyte maturation and ovulation in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdnerii), northern pike (Esok lucius), and goldfish (Carassius auratus). J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33;974-88
Jalabert, B. and D. Szöllösi, 1975 In vitro ovulation of trout oocytes: effects of prostaglandins on smooth muscle-like cells of the theca. Prostaglandins, 9:765-78
Jalabert, B., B. Breton and R. Billard, 1974 Dosage biologique des hormones gonadotropes de poisson par le test de maturation in vitro des ovocytes de truite. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 14:217-28
Jalabert, B., B. Breton and C. Bry, 1972 Maturation at ovulation in vitro des ovocytes de la Truite arc-en-ciel Salmo gairdnerii. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris (D), 275:1139-42
Jalabert, B., B. Breton and A. Fostier, 1978 Precocious induction of oocyte maturation and ovulation in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri); problems when using 17a -hydroxy-20ß-dihydroprogesterone. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:977-84
Jalabert, B. et al., 1973 Étude comparée de l'action des hormones hypophysaires et stéroids sur la maturation in vitro des ovocytes de la truite et du carassin (Poissons téléostéen). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 13:59-72
____1974, Determinisme du sexe chez Tilapia macrochir et Tilapia nilotica: action de la methyltestosterone dans l'alimentation des alevins sur la differentiation sexuelle; proportion des sexes dans la descendance des males "inverses", Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 14:729-39
____1977, A new tool for induced spawning: the use of 17a -hydroxy-20ß-dihydroprogesterone to spawn carp at low temperature. Aquaculture, 10:353-64
____1978, Precocious induction of oocyte maturation and ovulation in coho salmon, Oncorhynchus kisutch. J. Fish Res. Board Can., 35:1423-9
Jhingran, V.G., 1975 Fish and fisheries of India. Delhi, Hindustan Publishing Corporation, 954 p.
Jhingran, V.G. and V. Gopalakrishnan, 1974 A catalogue of cultivated aquatic organisms. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (130):83 p.
Johnstone, R., T.H. Simpson and A.E. Walker, 1979 Sex reversal in salmonid Culture. Part 3. The production and performance of all female populations of brook trout. Aquaculture, 18:241-52
Jolles, J. et al., 1977 The evolution of gonadotropins: some molecular data concerning a non-mammalian pituitary gonadotropin, the hormone from a teleost fish (Cyprinus carpio L.). Biochimie, 59:893-8
Jose, T.M. and A.G. Sathyanesan, 1977 Pituitary cytology of the Indian carp Labeo rohita (Ham.). Anat. Anz., 142:410-23
Kapur, K. and H.S. Toor, 1979 The effect of clomiphene citrate on ovulation and spawning in indomethacin treated carp, Cyprinus carpio. J. Fish Biol., 14:59-66
Katz, Y. and B. Eckstein, 1974 Changes in steroid concentration in blood of female Tilapia aurea (Teleostei Cichlidae) during initiation of spawning. Endocrinology, 95:963-7
Kaul, S. and L. Vollrath, 1974 The goldfish pituitary. 1. Cytology. Cell Tissue Res., 154:211-30
Kavaliers, M., 1979 Pineal involvement in the control of circadian rhythmicity in the lake chub, Couesius plumbeus. J. Exp. Zool., 209:33-40
Kawamura, T. and S. Otsuka, 1950 On acceleration of the ovulation in the goldfish. Jap. J. Ichthyol., 1:157-65
Kaya, C.M., 1973 Effects of temperature and photoperiod on seasonal regression of gonads of green sunfish, Lepomis cyanellus. Copeia, 1973:369-73
Kaya, C.M. and A.O. Hasler, 1972 Photoperiod and temperature effects on the gonads of green sunfish, Lepomis cyanellus (Rafinesque), during the quiescent, winter phase of its annual cycle. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 101:270-5
Kazanskii, B.N., 1949 The vy'un unit for measurement of the gonadotropic activity of preparations in the hypophysis of fish. Tr. Lab. Osnov. Rybovod., 2
Kelly, D.E., 1962 Pineal organs Photoreception, secretion and development. Am. Sci., 50:597-625
Khanna, D.V., 1958 Observations on the spawning of the major carps at a fish farm in the Punjab. Indian J. Fish., 5:282-90
Kim, Y.S. et al., 1978 Estrogen and androgen target Cells in the brain of fishes, reptiles and birds: phylogeny and ontogeny. Am. Zool., 18:425-35
Kime, D.E., 1979 Androgen biosynthesis in teleost and elasmobranch fishes. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:429-35
Kirshenblat, Ia.D., 1959 Action of cortisone on the ovaries of the loach. Byull. Ehksp. Biol. Med., 47:503-7
Knowles, F. and L. Vollrath, l966a Neurosecretory innervations of the pituitary of the eels Anguilla and Conger. 1. The structure and ultrastructure of the neurointermediate lobe under normal and experimental conditions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. (B Biol. Sci.), 250:311-27
____1966b, Neurosecretory innervation of the pituitary of the eels Anguilla and Conger. 2. The structure and innervation of the pars distalis at different stages of the life-cycle. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. (B Biol. Sci.), 250:329-42
____1966c, Cell types in the pituitary of the eel, Anguilla anguilla L. at different stages in the life cycle. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 69:474-79
____1966d, Changes in the pituitary of the migrating European eel during its journey from rivers to the sea. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 75:317-27
Korsgaard, B. and I. Petersen, 1979 Vitellogenin, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism during Vitellogenesis and pregnancy, and after hormonal induction in the blenny Zoarces viviparus (L.). Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (B Comp. Biochem.), 63:245-51
Krockert, G., 1936a Die wirkung der verfutterung von schilddrussen and ziereldrus ensustanz an Lebistes reticulatus (Zahnkarpfen). Z. Gesamte Exp. Med., 98:214-20
____1936b, Entwicklungsanderungen bei der fischart cichliden durch varabreichung von schilddruse ziebelund, thymusdruse. Z. Gesamte Exp. Med., 99:451-5
Kunesh, W.H. et al., 1974 Altering the spawning cycle of rainbow trout by control of artificial light. Prog. Fish-Cult., 36:225-6
Kuo, C-M. and C.E. Nash, 1975 Recent progress on the control of ovarian development and induced spawning of the grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.). Aquaculture, 5:19-29
____1979, Annual reproductive cycle of milkfish, Chanos chanos Forskal, in Hawaiian waters. Aquaculture, 16:247-52
Kuo, C-M., C.E. Nash and Z.H. Shehadeh, 1974a The effects of temperature and photoperiod on ovarian development in captive grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.). Aquaculture, 3:25-43
Kuo, C-M., C.E. Nash and Z.H. Shehadeh, 1974b A procedural guide to induce spawning in grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.). Aquaculture, 3:1-14
Kuo, C-M., Z.H. Shehadeh and K.K. Milisen, 1973 A preliminary report on the development, growth and survival of laboratory reared larvae of the grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.). J. Fish Biol., 5:459-70
Kuo, C-M., Z.H. Shehadeh and C.E. Mash, 1973 Induced spawning of captive grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.) females by injection of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). Aquaculture, 1:429-32
Laird, L.M. et al., 1978 The development of the gonadal and immune systems in the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) and a consideration of the possibility of inducing autoimmune destruction of the testes. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1101-6
Lake, J.S., 1967 Rearing experiments with five species of Australian freshwater fishes. 1. Inducement to spawning. Aust. J. Mar. Freshwat. Res., 18:137-53
Lam, T.J. and C.L. Soh, 1975 Effect of photoperiod on gonadial maturation in the rabbitfish, Siganus canaliculatus Aquaculture, 5:407-10
Lam, T.J. et al., 1978 Endocrine control of oogenesis, ovulation and oviposition in goldfish. In Comparative endocrinology, edited by P.J. Gaillard and H.H. Boer. Amsterdam, Elsevier/North-Holland, Biomedical Press, pp. 55-64
Lambert, J.G.D., 1978 Steroidogenesis in the ovary of Brachydanio rerio (Teleostei). In Comparative endocrinology, edited by P.J. Gaillard and H.H. Boer. Amsterdam, Elsevier/North-Holland, Biomedical Press, pp. 65-8
Lambert, J.G.D. and M.G.E. Pot, 1975 Steroidogenesis in ovarian tissue of a viviparous teleost, the guppy Poecilia reticulata. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (B Comp. Biochem.), 50:585-9
Lambert, J.G.D. and Ch. G. van Bohemen, Steroidogenesis in the ovary of the rainbow trout, 1979 Salmo gairdneri, during the reproductive cycle. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:414-20
Lambert, J.G.D; et al., 1978 Annual cycle of plasma oestradiol-17ß in the female trout Salmo gairdneri. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:923-7
Lance, V. and I. Callard, 1978 Hormonal control of ovarian Steroidogenesis in non-mammalian vertebrates. In The vertebrate ovary, edited by R.E. Jones. New York, Plenum Press, pp. 361-407
Leatharland, J.F., 1970a Seasonal variation in the structure and ultrastructure of the pituitary in the marine form (Trachurus) of the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus L. 2. Proximal pars distalis and neurointermediate lobe. Z Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 104:318-36
____1970b, Structure and ultrastructure of the neurohypophysis of the viviparus teleost, Cymatogaster aggregata Gibbons. Can. J. Zool., 48:1087-91
Lehri, G.K., 1966 Studies on the pituitary gland in relation to the gonadal cycle in Clarias batrachus (Linn.). Naturwissenschaften, 53:20
____1970, Correlative cyclical changes in the pituitary gland and the testis of catfish, Clarias batrachus (Linn.). Mikroskopie, 26:50-6
Leray, C., 1965 Sur la caractérisation histochimique d'un type cellulaire rich en acides sialiques dans la pars distalis de l'hypophyse de la carpe (Cyprinus carpio, L.). C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, 162:1271-3
____1966, Apport de la méthode de précipitation sélective par l'acide trichloroacetique dans l'étude histophysiologique de l'hypophyse d'un Téléostéen: Mugil cephalus. C.R. Séances Soc. Biol. Paris, 160:582-5
Leray, C. and N. Carlson, 1963 Sur la présence d'une dualité parmi les cellules cyanophiles de l'adenohypophyse de Mugil cephalus L. (Téléostéen, Mugilidae). C.R. Séances Soc. Biol. Paris, 157:572-5
Liao, I.C., 1969 Artificial propagation of grey mullet, Mugil cephalus Linnaeus. Fish. Ser. Chin. - Am. Jt. Comm. Rural Reconstr., 8:10-20
____1975, Experiments on induced breeding of the grey mullet in Taiwan from 1965-1973. Aquaculture, 6:31-58
Liley, N.R., Hormones and reproductive behaviour in fishes. In Fish physiology, edited by 1969 W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 3:73-116
Lin, S., 1965 Induced spawning of Chinese carps by pituitary injection in Taiwan. Fish. Ser. Chin. - Am. Jt. Comm. Rural Reconstr., 5:1-31
Lindberg, J.M., 1979 The development of a commercial Pacific salmon culture business. In Advances in aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., for FAO, pp. 441-7
Lofts, B., 1968 Patterns of testicular activity. In Perspectives in endocrinology, edited by E.J.W. Barrington and C. Barker Jorgensen. New York, Academic Press, pp. 239-304
Lofts, B. and H.A. Bern, 1972 The functional morphology of steroidogenic tissues, In Steroids in non-mammalian vertebrates, edited by D.R. Idler. New York, Academic Press, pp. 37-125
Lofts, B., G.E. Pickford and J.W. Atz, 1966 Effects of methyl testosterone on the testes of a hypophysectomized cyprinodont fish, Fundulus heteroclitus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 6:74-88
Lupo, C., G. Matterazzi and G. Chieffi, 1970 In vitro steroidogenesis in the testicular tissue of the freshwater teleost Esox lucius. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 14:595-8
Machado, C.R. and N. Castagnolli, 1979 Preliminary observations related to culture of Rhamdia hilarii, a Brazilian catfish. In Advances in aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., for FAO, pp. 180-4
Manevonk, S. et al., 1978 On the mass production of sea bass (Lates calcarifer Bloch) In Annual report of the Songkla Marine Fisheries Station. Bangkok, Department of Fisheries, pp. 171-84 (in Thai, English abstract)
Mano, Y. and M. Yoshida, 1969 A novel composition of phosvitins from salmon and trout roe. J. Biol. Chem., 66:105-11
Masui, Y. and H.G. Clarke, 1979 Oocyte maturation. Int. Rev. Cytol., 57:185-282
Mattheij, J.A.M., 1970 The gonadotropic cells in the adenohypophysis of the blind Mexican cave fish, Anoptichthys jordani. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 105:91-106
Matty, A.J., Pineal and some pituitary hormone rhythms in fish. In Rhythmic activity of 1978 fishes edited by J.E. Thorpe. New York, Academic Press, pp. 21-30
McKeown, B.A. and J.F. 1973 Leatherland, Fine structure of the adenohypophysis in immature sock-eye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 140:459-71
McKeown, B.A. and A.P. van Overbeeke, 1971 Immunohistochemical identification of pituitary hormone producing cells in the sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Walbaum). Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 11:350-62
Medlen, A.B., 1951 Preliminary observations on the effects of temperature and light upon reproduction in Gambusia affinis. Copeia, 1951:148-52
Meier, A.H. et al., 1978 Circadian hormone basis for seasonal conditions in the Gulf killifish, Fundulus grandis. In Comparative endocrinology, edited by P.J. Gaillard and H.H. Boer. Amsterdam, Elsevier/North-Holland, Biomedical Press, pp. 141-4
Minneman, K.P. and R.J. Wurtman, 1976 The pharmacology of the pineal gland. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 16:33-51
Moav, R. and G.W. Wohlfarth, Carp breeding in Israel. In Agricultural genetics - selected 1973 topics, edited by R. Moav. New York, John Wiley, pp. 295-318
Moczarski, M. 1977 Deep freezing of carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) sperm. Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci. (Sci. Biol.), 25:187-90
Moe, M.J. Jr., 1969 Biology of the red grouper Epinephelus morio (Valenciennes) from the eastern gulf of Mexico. Prof. Pap. Fla. Pep. Nat. Resour., (10):95 p.
Moitra, S.K. and S.K. Sarkar, 1976a The morphohistology of the. pituitary glands in two freshwater major carps of India, Labeo rohita (Ham.) and Cirrhinus mrigala (Ham.). Anat. Anz., 139:421-41
____1976b, Seasonal variations in the histology of the pituitary gland of Cirrhinus mrigala (Ham.) an Indian major carp, in relation to gonadal activity. Z. Mikrosk. - Anat. Forsch., 90:151-74
Morita, Y and G. Bargmann, 1971 Physiological studies and some further remarks on the structure of the photosensitive pineal organ of Pterophyllum scalare Cuv. et Val (Cichlidae, Teleostei). Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 107:522-50
Mounib, M.S., 1978 Cryogenic preservation of fish and mammalian spermatozoa. J. Reprod. Fert., 53:13-8
Munro, J.L. et al., 1973 The spawning seasons of Caribbean reef fishes. J. Fish Biol., 5:69-84
Nagahama, Y., 1973 Histo-physiological studies on the pituitary gland of some teleost fishes, with special reference to the classification of hormone-producing cells in the adenohypophysis. Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 21:1-60
Nagahama, Y. and K. Yamamoto, 1970 Morphological studies on the pituitary of the chum salmon Oncorhunchus keta (1). Fine structure of the adenohypophysis. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 20:293-302
Nandi, J., 1967 Comparative endocrinology of steroid hormones in vertebrates. Am. Zool., 7:115-34
Nash, C.E. and C.M. Kuo, 1976 Preliminary capture, husbandry and induced breeding results with the milkfish, Chanos chanos. In Proceedings of the International Milkfish Workshop Conference, Iloilo, Philippines, May 19-22, 1976. Tigbauan, Iloilo, SEAFDEC, pp. 139-60
Nath, P. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1977 Inhibition of vitellogenesis in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) by antiserum raised against partially-purified conspecific gonadotropin. Anat. Rec., 187:773-4
____1981a, Isolation and identification of female-specific serum lipophpsphoprotein (vitellogenin) in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 43
____1981b, Induction of vitellogenesis in the hypophysectomized catfish, Heterpneustes fossilis (Bloch); Effects of piscine and mammalian hormones. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 43
Nayyar, S,K. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1969 Effect of pituitary hormones, androgens, and corticosteroids on the seminal vesicles of the castrate catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 172:385-98
____1970a, Seasonal reproductive activity in the testes and seminal vesicles of the catfish. Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Morphol., 130:207-26
____1970b, Response of the seminal vesicles of the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) to exogenous androgens, estrogen and cortico-steroid. J. Fish Biol., 2:69-78
Nayyar, S.K. et al., 1976 Maintenance of spermatogenesis and seminal vesicles in the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch): Effects of ovine and salmon gonadotropin and testosterone. Can. J. Zool., 54:285-92
Ng, T.B. and D.R. Idler, 1978a "Big" and "little" forms of plaice vitellogenic and maturational hormones. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 34:408-20
____1978b, A vitellogenic hormone with a large and small form from salmon pituitaries, Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 35:189-95
____1979, Studies on two types of gonadotropins from both American plaice and winter flounder pituitaries. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 38:410-20
Ng, T.B, C.M. Campbell and D.R. Idler, 1980 Antibody inhibition of vitellogenesis and oocyte maturation in salmon and flounder. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 41:233-9
Nicholls, T.J, and G.P. Graham, 1972 The ultrastructure of lobule boundry cells and Leydig cell homologs in the testis of the cichlid fish, Cichlasoma nigrofasciatum. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 19:133-47
Nicoll, C.S., 1975 Radio immune as say and radioreceptor assays for prolacting and growth hormone: a critical appraisal. Am. Zool., 15:881-903
Nomura, M., 1962 Studies on reproduction of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, with special reference to egg taking. 3. Acceleration of spawning by control of light. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 28:1070-6
Nomura, M., K. Sakai and F. Takashima, 1974 The over-ripening phenomenon of rainbow trout. 1. Temporal morphological changes of eggs retained in the body cavity after ovulation. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 40:977-84
Norrevang, A., 1968 Electron microscopic morphology of oogenesis. Int. Rev. Cytol., 23:113-86
O, W-S. and T.H. Chan, 1974 A cytological study on the ultrastructure of the pituitary gland of Monopterus albus (Zuieu). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 24:208-22
O'Connor, J.M., 1972 Pituitary gonadotropin release patterns in prespawning brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis, rainbow trout Salmo gairdneri and leopard frogs, Rana pipiens. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. (A Comp. Physiol.), 43:739-46
Oguri, M. and Y. Omura, 1973 Ultrastructure and functional significance of the pineal organ in teleosts. In Responses of fish to environmental changes, edited by W. Chavin. Springfield, Charles C. Thomas Publishers, pp. 412-34
Oksche, A. and H. Kirschstein, 1967 Die ultrastruktur der sinneszellen im pinealorgan von Phoxinus laevis L. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 78:151-66
Olcese, J. and V.L. de Vlaming, 1977 Possible, pineal organ involvement in the control of hypothalamic monoamine oxidase activity in the goldfish. Am. Zool., 17:875
Olivereau, M., 1968 Étude cytologique de l'hypophyse du Muge, en particulier en relation avec salinité extérieure. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 87:545-61
____1978, Les cellules gonadotropes chez les salmonidés. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:793-8
Olivereau, M. and M. Herlant, 1960 Étude de l'hypophyse de l'aguilla mâle du cours de la reproduction. C.R. Séances Soc. Biol. Paris, 154:706-9
Owman, C. and C. Rudeberg, 1970 Light, fluorescence, and electron microscope studies on the pineal organ of the pike, Esox lucius L., with special regard to 5-hydroxytryptamine. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 107:522-50
Ozon, R., 1972a Androgens in fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In Steroids in non-mammalian vertebrates, edited by D.R. Idler. New York, Academic Press, pp. 328-89
____1972b, Estrogens in fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In Steroids in non-mammalian vertebrates, edited by D.R. Idler. New York, Academic Press, pp. 390-413
Pandey, S. and W.S. Hoar, 1972 Induction of ovulation in goldfish by clomiphene citrate. Can. J. Zool., 50:1679-80
Pandey, S., N. Stacey and W.S. Hoar, 1973 Mode of action of clomiphene citrate in inducing ovulation in goldfish. Can. J. Zool., 51:1315-6
Pang, P.K.T., 1967 The effect of pinealectomy on the adult male killifish, Fundulus heteroclitus. Am. Zool., 7:715
Papkoff, H., D. Gospodarowickz and C.H. Li, 1967 Purification and properties of ovine follicle-stimulating hormone. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 120:434-9
Papkoff, H. et al., 1965 Preparation of ovine interstial cell-stimulating hormone in high yield. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 111:431-8
Pavlovici, I. and C. Vlad, 1976 Some data on the preservation of carp (Cyprinus carpio) seminal material by freezing. Cresterea Anim., 4:45-8 (issued also as Transl. Ser. Mar. Fish. Serv. Can., (3965)
Perks, A.M., 1969 The neurohypophysis. In Fish physiology, edited by W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 2:111-205
Peter, R.E., 1968 Failure to detect an effect of pinealectomy in goldfish. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 10:443-9
____1970, Hypothalamic control of thyroid gland activity and gonadal activity in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 14:334-56
____1973, Neuroendocrinology of teleosts. Am. Zool., 13:743-55
____1980, Serum gonadotropin levels in mature male goldfish in response to luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) and des-Gly^10-(D-Ala^6)-LH-RH ethylamide. Can. J. Zool., 58:1100-4
Peter, R.E. and R, Billard, 1976 Effects of third ventricle injection of prostaglandins on gonadotropin secretion in goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 30;451-6
Peter, R.E. and L.W, Crim, 1978 Hypothalamic lesions of goldfish: effects on gonadal recrudescence and gonadotropin secretion. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:819-23
____1979, Reproductive endocrinology of fishes: gonadal cycles and gonadotropin in teleosts. Ann. Rev. Physiol., 41:323-35
Peter, R.E. and J.N. Fryer, 1979 Endocrine functions of the hypothalamus of actinopterygiano, In Fish neurobiology and behaviour, edited by R.G. Northcutt and R.E, Davis. Ann. Arbor, University Michigan Press
Peter, R.E. and V.E. Gill, 1975 A stereotaxic atlas and technique for forebrain nuclei of the goldfish, Carassius auratus. J. Comp. Neurol., 159:69-102
Peter, R.E. and A. Hontela, 1978 Annual gonadal cycles in teleosts; environmental factors and gonadotropin levels in blood. In Environmental endocrinology, edited by I. Assenmacher and D.S, Earner. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 20-5
Peter, R.E., M.J. Macey and V.E. Gill, 1975 A stereotaxic atlas and technique for forebrain nuclei of the killifish, Fundulus heteroclitus. J. Comp. Neurol., 159:103-28
Peter, R.E. et al., 1978 Lesioning studies on the. gravid female goldfish: neuroendocrine regulation of ovulation. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 35:391-401
Peute, J, et al., 1976 Cytophysiology and innervation of gonadotropic cells in the pituitary of the black molly (Poecilia latipinna). Cell Tissue Res., 174:35-54
____1978, Ultrastructure and hormone content of the gonadotropic cells of the rainbow trout pituitary during the annual cycle. Ultrastructure and hormone content, Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:905-10
Pfeiffer, W., 1974 Pheromones in fish and amphibia. In Pheromones, edited by M.C. Birch. Amsterdam, North-Holland Publishing Company, pp. 269-96
Phillips, A.M. Jr. and R.P. Dumas, 1959 The chemistry of developing brown trout eyed eggs and sac fry. Prog. Fish-Cult., 21:161-4
Pickford, G.E. and J.W. Atz, 1957 The physiology of the pituitary gland of fishes. New York, Zoological Society, 613 p.
Pickford, G.E. et al., 1972 Testis stimulation in hypophysectomized male killifish, Fundulus heteroclitus, treated with mammalian growth hormone and/or luteinizing hormone. Biol. Reprod., 7:370-86
Pierce, J.G., M.R. Faith and E.M. Donaldson, 1976 Antibodies to reduced S-carboxymethylated alpha subunit of bovine luteinizing hormone and their application to study of the purification of gonadotropin from salmon (Onchorhynchus tshawytscha) pituitary glands. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 30:47-60
Poston, H.A., 1978 Neuroendocrine mediation of photoperiod and other environmental influences on physiological responses in salmonids: a review. Tech. Pap. U.S. Fish Wildl. Serv., (96):14 p.
Potards, M. and P. Sitasit, 1976 Induced spawning of Pangasius sutchi (Fowler). Tech. Pap. Freshwat. Fish. Div. Bangkok, (15)
Pruginin, Y. and B. Cirlin, 1975 Techniques used in controlled breeding and production of larvae and fry in Israel. EIFAC Tech. Pap., (25):90-100
Pullin, R.S.V. and H. Bailey, 1979 Progress in storing Marine flatfish eggs at low temperatures. Paper presented at the Symposium on the Early Life History of Fish. Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Mass., April 2-5, 1979. ICES/ELH Symp./Ra10
Quay, W.B., 1965 Retinal and pineal hydroxyindole-0-methyl-transferase activity in vertebrates. Life Sci., 4:983-91
Rai, B.P., 1972 Gonadotrops in agnatha, fishes and amphibia. Acta Anat., 81:42-52
Ralph, C.L., 1978a Pineal control of reproduction: Non-mammalian vertebrates. Prog. Reprod. Biol., 4:30-50
____1978b, Cytology of the pineal gland: changes produced by various treatments. J. Neural Transm., Suppl. 13:25-45
Ramaswami, L.S., 1962 Endocrinology of reproduction in fish and frog. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl. 1:286-99
Ramaswami, L.S. and A.B. Lakshman, 1960 Bioassay studies of the catfish and skipper-frog pituitary glands after treatment with some glycoprotein solvents. Proc. Natl. Inst. Sci. India, 26:30-9
Ramaswami, L.S. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1956 Induced spawning in the Indian catfish. Science, Wash., 123:1080
____1957, Induced spawning in the catfish Clarias. Naturwissenchaften, 44:384
Rao, P.D.P. and U.K. Betole, 1973 Changes in the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial complex after gonadectomy in the catfish, Clarias betrachus (Linn.). Zool. Beitr., 19:319-33
Rao, P.D.P., N. Subhedar and N. Ganesh, 1979 Different neuronal populations of the nucleus preopticus and their response to ovariectomy, and oestradiol benzoate treatment with a note on the gonadotrops in the catfish, Clarias betrachus (Linn.). Pro C. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:483-90
Rasquin, P., 1958 Studies in the control of pigment cells and light responses in recent teleost fishes. Am. Mus. Novit., (115):8-68
Raven, C.P., 1961 Oogenesis: the storage of developmental information. Oxford, Pergamon Press, 274 p.
Reinboth, R., 1972 Hormonal control of the teleost ovary. Am. Zool., 12:307-24
____1979, On steroidogenic pathways in ambisexual fishes. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:421-28
____1980, Behavioural aspects of sex inversion in certain fishes. In Fish behaviour and its use in the capture and culture of fishes, edited by J.J. Bardach et al., Manila, International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, (in press)
Reiter, R.J. et al., 1975 The pineal gland as an organ of internal secretion. In Frontiers of pineal physiology, edited by M.D. Altschule. Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press, pp. 54-174
Rizkalla, W., 1970 The morphology of the pineal organ in the teleost, Clarias lazera C.V, Acta Biol. Acad. Sci. Hung., 21:25-35
Robertson, O.H., 1958 Accelerated development of testis after unilateral gonadectomy with observations of the normal testis of rainbow trout. Fish. Bull. USFWS, 58(127):9-30
Sage, M. and H.A. Bern, 1971 Cytophysiology of the teleost pituitary. Int. Rev. Cytol., 31:339-76
Saidapur, S.K., 1978 Follicular atresia in the ovaries of non-mammalian vertebrates. Int. Rev. Cytol., 54:225-41
Saidapur, S.K. and V.B. Nadkarni, 1976 Steroid synthesizing cellular sites in the ovary of catfish, Mystus cavasius: a histochemical study. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 30:457-61
Sakai, K. et al., 1975 The over-ripening phenomenon of rainbow trout. 2. Changes in the percentage of eyed eggs, hatching rate and incidence of abnormal alevins during the process of over-ripening. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 41:855-60
Sanchez-Rodriguez, M. et al., 1978 The spermiation period in the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Plasma gonadotropin and androgen levels, sperm production and biochemical changes in the seminal fluid. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:943-8
Sandor, T., 1979 Comparative aspects of steroid biosynthesis in fish. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:391-406
Sangalang, G.B., H.C. Freeman and R.B. Flemming, 1978 A simple technique for determining the sex of fish by radioimmunoassay using 11-ketotestosterone antiserum. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 36:187-93
Sathyanesan, A.G., 1970 Hypothalamo-hypophysial vascularisation and its relationship with the neurosecretory system in the catfish Clarias batrachus (L.). Zool. Beitr., 17;1-11
____1971, Presence of hypothalamo-hypophysial portal system in the teleost Heteropneustes fossilis (B1.). Experientia, 27:462
____1972, Hypothalamo-hypophysial vascularisation in a teleost fish with special reference to its tetrapodan features. Acta Anat., 81;349-66
Saxena, P.K. and K. Anand, 1977 A comparison of ovarian recrudescence in the catfish, Mystus tengara (Ham.), exposed to short photoperiods to long photoperiods, and to melatonin. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 33:506-11
Schmidt, G. et al., 1965 Isolation of a phosphoprotein of high phosphorus content from the eggs of brown trout. Biochim. Biophys. Res. Commun., 18:60-5
Schneider, L., 1969 Experimentelle untersuchungen über den einfluss von tageslange und temperatur auf die gonadenreifung beim dreistachligen stichling (Gasterosteus aculeatus). Decologia, 3:249-65
Schonherr, J., 1955 Uber die abhangigkeit der instinkthandlungen vorderhirn und zwischenhirn (Epiphyse) bei Gasterosteus aculeatus L. Zool. Jahrb. (Allg. Zool. Physiol. Tierre), 65:357-86
Schreck, C.B. and M.L. Hopwood, 1974 Seasonal androgen and estrogen patterns in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 103:375-8
Schreck, C.B., S.A. Flickinger and M.L. Hopwood, 1972 Plasma androgen levels in intact and castrate rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 140:1009-11
Schreck, C.B., R.T. Lackey and M.L. Hopwood, 1972 Evaluation of diel variation in androgen levels of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri. Copeia, 1972:865-8
____1973, Plasma oestrogen levels in rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri Richardson. J. Fish, Biol., 5:227-30
Schreibman, M.P., J.F. Leatherland and B.A. McKeown, 1973 Functional morphology of the teleost pituitary gland. Am. Zool., 13:719-42
Schwassmann, H.O., 1971 Biological rhythms. In Fish physiology, edited by W.S. Hoar and D.J. Randall. New York, Academic Press, vol. 6:371-428
____1978, Times of annual spawning and reproductive strategies in Amazonian fishes. In Rhythmic activity of fishes, edited by J.E. Thorpe. London, Academic Press, pp. 187-200
Sebastian, M.J. and V.A. Nair, 1975 The induced spawning of the grey mullet, Mugil macrolepis (Agnos) Smith and the large-scale rearing of its larvae. Aquaculture, 5:41-52
Sehgal, A. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1970a Effects of various photoperiodic regimes on the ovary of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), during the spawning and the post-spawning periods. Biol. Reprod., 2:425-34
____1970b, Effects of blinding and/or total darkness on ovarian recrudescence or regression during the appropriate periods of the reproductive cycle of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Interdiscipl. Cycle Res., 1:147-59
Shehadeh, Z.H., Controlled breeding of culturable species of fish. A review of progress and 1973 current problems. In Coastal aquaculture in the Indo-Pacific Region, edited by T.V.R. Pillay, Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., for FAO, pp. 180-94
____1975, Induced breeding techniques. A review of progress and problems. Workshop on Controlled Reproduction of Cultivated Fishes. EIFAC Tech. Pap., 25:72-89
Shehadeh, Z.H. and J.N. Ellis, 1970 Induced spawning of the striped mullet, Mugil cephalus L. J. Fish Biol., 2:355-60
Shehadeh, Z.H., C.M. Kuo and K.K. Milisen, 1973 Induced spawning of grey mullet Mugil cephalus L. with fractionated salmon pituitary extract. J. Fish Biol., 5:471-8
Shehadeh, Z.H., W.D. Madden and T.P. Dohl, 1972 The effects of exogenous hormone treatment on spermiation, vitellogenesis and ovulation in the grey mullet, Mugil cephalus L. J. Fish Biol., 5:479-87
Shelbourne, J.E., 1964 The artificial propagation of marine fish. Adv. Mar. Biol., 2:1-83
Shelton, W.L., K.,D. Hopkins and G.L. Jensen, 1978 Use of hormones to produce monosex tilapia for aquaculture. In Culture of exotic fishes, edited by R.O. Smitherman, W.L. Shelton and J.H. Grover. Auburn, American Fisheries Society, pp. 10-33
Shiraishi, Y., 1965a The influence of photoperiodicity on the maturation of ayu-fish, Plecoglossus altivelis. 2. Relation between the maturation and the daylength. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Res. Lab. Tokyo, 15:59-68
____1965b, The influence of photoperiodicity on the maturation of ayu-fish. Plecoglossus altivelis. 3. The limit of the intensity of light. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Res. Lab. Tokyo, 15:69-76
____1965c, The influence of photoperiodicity on the maturation of ayu-fish, Plecoglossus altivelis. 4. The effect of Wavelength and of conversion of darkness and light on the maturation. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Reg. Lab. Tokyo. 15:77-84
____1965d, The influence of photoperiodicity on the maturation of ayu-fish, Plecoglossus altivelis. 5. The effect of removal of eye on the maturation. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Res. Lab. Tokyo, 15:85-90
Sidthimunka, A., J. Sanglert and O. Pawapootanon, 1968 Culture of catfish (Clarias spp.) in Thailand. FAO Fish. Rep., (44) vol. 5:196-204
Simpson, T.H. and R.S. Wright, 1977 A radioimmunoassay for 11-oxotestosterone: Its application in the measurement of levels in blood serum of rainbow trout (S. gairdneri). Steroids, 29;383-98
Sin, A.W., 1974 Preliminary results on cryogenic preservation of sperm of silver carp (Hypophthalamichthys molitrix) and bighead (Aristichthys nobilis). Hong Kong Fish. Bull., 4:33-6
Singh, S.B., 1969 Exological requirements for induced breeding of fishes. Paper presented at the FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Induced Breeding of Cultivated Fishes. Barrackpore, Cuttack and Bombay, India, 15 July - 18 August 1969. Rome, FAO, FRI/IBCF/10:25 p.
Sinha, V.R.P., 1969 Chromatography of fish pituitary extracts on Sephadex G100. J. Chromatogr., 44:624-8
____1971, Induced spawning in carp with fractionated fish pituitary extract. J. Fish Biol., 3:263-72
Sinha, V.R.P., V.G. Jhingran and S.V. Ganapati, 1974 A review on spawning of the Indian major carps. Arch. Hydrobiol., 73:518-36
Smith, J.R. and L.J. Weber, 1974 Diurnal fluctuations in acetylserotonin methyltransferase (ASMT) activity in the pineal gland of the steelhead trout (Salmo gairdneri). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 147:441-3
Smith, J.R, and L.J. Weber, 1976a Alterations in diurnal pineal hydroxyindole-0-methyltransferase (HIOMT) activity in steelhead trout (Salmo gairdneri) associated with changes in environmental background color. Comp. Biochem. Physiol., 53C:33-5
____1976b, The regulation of day-night changes in hydroxyindole-0-methyltransferase activity in the pineal gland of steelhead trout (Salmo gairdneri). Can. J. Zool., 54:1530-4
Sneed, K.E. and H.P. Clemens, 1960 Use of fish pituitaries to induce spawning in channel catfish. Spec. Sci. Rep. USFWS (Fish.), (329):12 p
Sokolowska, M., W. Popek and K. Bieniarz, 1978 Synthetic releasing hormone LH/FSH-RH and LH-RH: effect of intracerebral and intramuscular injections on female carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) maturation. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:963-7
Spieler, R.E. et al., 1977 Effects of thermocycles on body weight gain and gonadal growth in the goldfish, Carassius auratus, Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 106:440-4
Stacey, N.E. and S. Pandey, 1975 Effects of indomethacin and prostaglandins on ovulation of goldfish. Prostaglandins, 9:597-607
Stacey, N.E., A.F. Cook and R.E. Peter, 1979 Ovulatory surge of gonadotropin in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 37:246-9
Stahl, A., 1957 Recherches sur les élaborations cellulaires et la neurosécrétion dans l'encéphale des poissons téléostéens. Acta Anat., 31:(Suppl., 28):1-158
____1963, Cytophysiologie de l'adénohypophyse des poissons (spécialement en relation avec la fonction gonadotrope). Colloq. Int. Cent. Nat. Rech. Sci., Paris, 128:331-44
Stanley, J.G., 1979 Manipulation of developmental events to produce monosex and sterile fish. Paper presented at the symposium on the Early Life History of Fish, Woods Hole, Mass, April, 2-5, 1979. ICES/ELH Symp./RA2
Stanley, H., G. Chieffi and V. Botte, 1965 Histological and his to chemical observations on the testis of Gobius paganellus. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 65:350-62
Stein, H. and H. Bayrle, 1978 Cryopreservation of the sperm of some freshwater teleosts. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1073-6
Stevens, R.E., 1966 Hormone-induced spawning of striped bass for reservoir stocking. Prog. Fish. Cult., 28:19-28
Stoss, J., S. Büyükhatipoglu and W. Holtz, 1978 Short-term and cryopreservation of rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri Richardson) sperm. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1077-82
Stroganov, M.S. and V.V. Alpator, 1951 A new unit for determining the activity of the hypophysis in fish. Ryb. Khoz., 24:56-60 (in Russian)
Sundararaj, B.I., 1958 The seminal vesicles and their seasonal changes in the Indian catfish, Heteropneustes. Copeia. 1958:289-97
____1959, A study on the correlation between the structure of the pituitary gland of the Indian catfish, Heteropneustes and the seasonal changes in the ovary. Acta Anat., 37:47-80
____1960, Correlation between the structure of the pituitary and the changes in the testes of the Indian catfish Heteropneustes. Acta Anat., 40:305-22
Sundararaj, B.I., 1978 Environmental regulation of annual reproductive cycles in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis. In Environmental endocrinology, edited by I. Assenmacher and D.S. Farner. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 26-7
Sundararaj, B.I. and T.C. Anand, 1972 Effects of piscine and mammalian gonadotropins on gametogenesis in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Supply, 3:688-702
Sundararaj, B.I. and S.K. Garg, 1980 Evidence for the involvement of the pineal organ in the control of locomotor rhythms in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Anat. Rec., 196:252A-253A
Sundararaj, B.I. and S.V. Goswami, 1966a Effects of mammalian hypophysial hormones, placental gonadotrophins, gonadal hormones and adrenal corticosteroids on ovulation and spawning in hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 161:287-98
____1966b, Effect of metopiron (SU-4885) on luteinizing hormone and corticosteroid induced ovulation and spawning in hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 163:49-54
____1966c, In vitro production of corticosteroids by luteinizing hormone: a new interpretation of LH-induced ovulation in catfish. Excerpta Med. Found. Int. Conor. Ser., (111):368-9
____1968, Effects of estrogen, progesterone and testosterone on the pituitary and ovary of catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 169:211-28
____1969a, Techniques of hypophysation of catfishes; Paper presented to the FAO/UNDP Regional seminar on induced breeding of cultivated fishes, Calcutta-Cuttack-Bombay, 15 July - 18 August, 1969. Rome, FAO, FRI/IBCF/15:23 p.
____1969b, Role of interrenal in luteinizing hormone-induced ovulation and spawning in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl., 2:374-84
____1973, Comparative aspects of oocyte maturation in submammalian vertebrates: A review. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B), 39:286-95
____1974, Effects of ovine luteinizing hormone and procine adrenocorticotropin on maturation of oocytes of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), in ovary-inter-renal coculture. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 23:276-81
____1977a, Hormonal effects on oocyte maturation in fish. In Endocrinology, edited by V.H.T. James. Excerpta Med. Found. Int. Congr. Ser., (402) vol. 1:341-5
____1977b, Hormonal regulation of in vivo and in vitro oocyte maturation in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 32:17-28
Sundararaj, B.I. and P. Keshavanath, 1976 Effects of melatonin and prolactin treatment on the hypophysial-ovarian system in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 29:84-96
Sundararaj, B.I. and P. Nath, Steroid-induced synthesis of vitellogenin in the catfish, 1981 Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 43:
Sundararaj, B.I. and S.K. Nayyar, 1967 Effects of exogenous gonadotrophins and gonadal hormones, on the testes and seminal vesicles of hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 8:403-16
Sundararaj, B.I. and S.K. Nayyar, 1969a Effects of castration and/or hypophysectomy on the seminal vesicles of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Exp. Zool., 172:369-84
____1969b, Effect of prolactin on the "seminal vesicles" and neural regulation of prolactin secretion in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl., 2:69-80
____1969c, Effect of extirpation of "seminal vesicles" on the reproductive performance of the male catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Physiol. Zool., 42:429-37
Sundararaj, B.I, and T.S.A, Samy, 1974 Some aspects of chemistry and biology of piscine gonadotropins. In Gonadotropins and gonadal function, edited by N.R. Moudgal. New York, Academic Press, pp. 118-27
Sundararaj, B.I. and A. Sehgal, 1970a Effects of a long or an increasing photoperiod on the initiation of ovarian recrudescence during the preparatory period in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Biol. Reprod., 2:413-24
____1970b, Responses of the pituitary and ovary of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) to accelerated light regimen of a decreasing followed by an increasing photoperiod during the postspawning period. Biol. Reprod., 2:435-43
____1970c, Short- and long-term effects of imposition of total darkness on the annual ovarian cycle of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Interdiscipl. Cycle Res., 1:291-301
Sundararaj, B.I. and S. Vasal, 1976 Photoperiod and temperature control in the regulation of reproduction in the female catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33:959-73
Sundararaj, B.I. and N. Viswanathan, 1971 Hypothalamo-hypophyseal neurosecretory and vascular systems in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Comp. Neurol., 141:95-106
Sundararaj, B.I., T.C. Anand and E.M. Donaldson, 1972 Effects of partially purified salmon pituitary gonadotropin on ovarian maintenance, ovulation, and vitellogenesis in the hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 18:102-14
Sundararaj, B.I., T.C. Anand and V.R.P. Sinha, 1972 Effects of carp pituitary fractions on vitellogenesis, ovarian maintenance, and ovulation in hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). J. Endocrinol., 54:87-98
Sundararaj, B.I., S.V. Goswami and E.M. Donaldson, 1972 Effect of salmon gonadotropin on in vitro maturation of oocytes of a catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 29:435-37
Sundararaj, B.I., S.V. Goswami and V. Lamba, 1979 Some aspects of oocyte maturation in catfish. J. Steroid Biochem., 11:701-7
Sundararaj, B.I. V. Lamba and S.V. Goswami, 1980 Seasonal reproduction in fish. Steroid profiles in annually breeding fish. In Endocrinology 1980, edited by I.A. Cumming, J.W. Funder and F.A.O. Mendelsohn. Canberra, Australian Academy of Science, pp. 267-72
Sundararaj, B.I., S. Vasal and F. Halberg, 1973 Circannual rhythmic ovarian recrudescence in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis. Int. J. Chronobiol., 1:362-3
Sundararaj, B.I. et al., 1971 Effects of salmon pituitary gonadotropin, ovine luteinizing hormone, and testosterone on the testes and seminal vesicles of hypophysectomized catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 17:73-82
____1976, Effects of carp gonadotropin on ovarian maintenance, maturation, and ovulation. in hypophysectomized catfish,. Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 30:472-6
Takahashi, H. and S. Kasuga, 1971 Fine structure of the pineal organ of the medaka, Oryzias latipes. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 22:1-10
Takashima, F., M. Nomura and K. Sakai, 1975 The over-ripening phenomenon of rainbow trout. 3. Histological studies on the physiological condition of over-ripened females. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 41:861-7
Tamaoki, B., 1980 Biosynthesis and conversion of androgens in non-mammalian vertebrates. In Steroids and their mechanism of action in non-mammalian vertebrates, edited by G. Delrio and J. Brachet. New York, Raven Press, pp. 1-15
Tan, E.S.P. and J.M. Dodd, 1978 Immunological relatedness of gonadotrophins of various fishes as shown by radioimmunoassays. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:781-5
Tang, Y.A., 1964 Induced spawning of striped mullet by hormone injection. Jap. J. Ichthyol., 12:23-8
Tavolga, W.N., 1956 Visual, chemical and sound stimuli as cues in the sex discriminatory behaviour of the gobiid fish Bathygobius soporator. Zoologica, N.Y., 41:49-64
Terkatin-Shimony, A. and Z. Yaron, 1978 Estrogens and estrogenic effects in Tilapia aurea (Cichlidae, Teleostei) Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Bjophys., 18:1007-12
Terlou, M. and B. Ekengren, 1979 Nucleus praeopticus and nucleus lateral is tuberis of Salmo salar and Salmo gairdneri: structure and relationship to the hypophysis. Cell. Tissue Res., 197:1-21
Terlou, M., J.P. de Jong and P.G.W.J. van Oordt, 1978 Scanning cytophotometry: a method for studying the amount of neurosecretory material in the preoptic nucleus of the trout (Salmo gairdneri). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:851-6
Thakur, N.K., 1976 On the spawning behaviour of Clarias batrachus, Jap. J. Ichthyol., 23:178-80
Truscott, B. et al., 1978 Effects of gonadotropins and adrenocorticotropin on plasmatic steroids of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 34:149-57
Ueda, H, and T. Hirashima, 1979 On two different types of putative gonadotrophs in the pituitary gland of the masu salmon, Qncorhynchus masou. Annot. Zool. Japon., 52:114-24
Ungar, F. et al., 1977 Formation of 3a -hydroxy-5ß-pregnan-20-one in the ovaries of catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 31:53-59
Upadhyay, S.N., B, Breton and R. Billard, 1978 Ultrastructural studies on experimentally induced vitellogenesis in juvenile rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri R.). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1019-25
Urasaki, H., 1972a Effects of restricted photoperiod and melatonin administration on gonadal weight in the Japanese killifish. J. Endocrinol., 55;619-20
Urasaki, H., 1972b Role of the pineal gland in gonadal development in the fish, Oryzias latipes. Annot. Zool. Japon., 45:152-8
____1972c, Effect of pinealectomy on gonadal development in the Japanese killifish (medaka), Oryzias latipes. Annot. Zool. Japon., 45:10-5
____1973, Effect of pinealectomy and photoperiod on oviposition and gonadal development in the fish, Oryzias latipes. J. Exp. Zool., 185:241-6
____1976, The role of the pineal and eyes in the photoperiodic effect on the gonad of the medaka, Oryzias latipes. Chronobiologia, 3:228-34
____1977, Response of the. hypophyseal-ovarian system of the teleost. Oryzias latipes, to administration of melatonin. Bull. Lib. Arts Sci. Course Sci. Med. Nihon Univ., (5):15-8
Val-Sella, M.V. and A. Sesso, 1980 Thin section and freeze fracture studies of the hypophyseal proximal pars distalis in a teleost (Rhamdia hilarii Val.) during different stages of the. reproductive cycle. Cell Tissue Res., 208:433-44
van Bohemen, Ch.G. and J.G.D. Lambert, 1978 Steroidogenesis in the ovary of the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri. J. Endocrinol., 80:37-8
van de Kamer, J.C., 1965 Histological structure and cytology of the pineal complex in fishes, amphibians and reptiles. Prog. Brain Res., 10:30-48
van den Hurk, R. and J. Peute, 1979 Cyclic changes in the ovary of the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, with special reference to sites of Steroidogenesis. Cell Tissue Res., 199:289-306
van den Hurk, R. et al., 1978 Cyclic changes in the testis and vas deferens of the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri) with special reference to sites of Steroidogenesis. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:899-904
van Oordt, P.G.W.J. and B. Ekengren, 1978 The gonadotropic cell in the pituitary of teleosts and the central regulation of its activity. In Comparative endocrinology, edited by P.J. Gaillard and H.H. Boer. Amsterdam, Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press, pp. 353-6
van Ree, G.E., 1977a Histological and enzyme-histochemical study of the ovary of zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio. Ham. Buch., in vitro. 1. Effects of duration of cultivation on the ovaries in organ culture. Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. (Ser. C), 80:313-22
____1977b, Histological and enzyme-histochemical study of the ovary of zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio Ham. Buch., in vitro. 2. Effects of ovine luteinizing hormone, carp gonadotropic hormone and 11-deoxycorticosteronacetate on ovarian fragments in short-term organ culture. Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. (Ser. C), 80:323-40
Vanstone, W.E., A.C. Villaluz and L.B; Tiro Jr., 1976 Spawning of milkfish, Chanos chanos, in captivity. In Proceedings of the International Milkfish Workshop Conference, Iloilo, Philippines, May 19-22, 1976. Tigbauan, Iloilo, SEAFDEC, pp. 222-8
Vanstone, W.E. et al., 1977 Breeding and larval rearing of the milkfish Chanos chanos (Pisces: Chanidae). SEAFDEC Tech. Rep., (3):3-17
Varghese, T.J. and G.P.S. Rao, 1976 On the use of marine catfish pituitary glands for induced spawning of silver carp and catla. Curr. Sci., 45:302
Varghese, T.J. et al., 1975 Preliminary observation on the use of marine catfish pituitary glands for induced spawning of the Indian major carps. Curr. Sci., 44:75-8
Vasal. S. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1975 Response of the regressed ovary of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), to interrupted-night photoperiods. Chronobiologia, 2:224-39
____1976, Response of the ovary in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), to various combinations of photoperiod and temperature. J. Exp. Zool., 197:247-64
____1978, Thermal tolerance and preference of the Indian catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis. Environ. Biol. Fish., 3:309-15
Vaughan, M.K. and D.E. Blask, 1978 Arginine vasotocin a search for its function in mammals. Prog. Reprod. Biol., 4:90-1.15
Verghese, P.U., 1967 Prolongation of spawning season in the carp Cirrhina reba (Ham.) by artificial light treatment. Curr. Sci., 36:465-7
____1970, Preliminary experiments on the modification of the reproductive cycle of an Indian carp Cirrhina reba (Ham.) by control of light and temperature. Proc. IPFC, 13:171-84
____1975, Internal rhythm of sexual cycle in a carp Cirrhina reba (Ham.) under artificial conditions of darkness. J. Inland Fish. Soc. India, 7:182-8
Viswanathan, N. and B.I. Sundararaj, 1974a Seasonal changes in the hypothalamo-hypophyseal-ovarian system in the catfish, Heteropneustes fossills (Bloch). J. Fish Biol., 6:331-40
____1974b, Response of the hypothalamo-hypophyseal-ovarian system of the catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch), to administration of estrogen and androgen. Neuroendocrinology, 16:212-24
Vodicnik, M.J. et al., 1978 The effects of pinealectomy on pituitary and plasma gonadotropin levels in Carassius auratus exposed to various photoperiod-temperature regimes. J. Fish Biol., 12:187-96
Vollrath, L., 1967 Ober die neurosekretorische innervation der adenohypophyse von teleostiern, insbesondere von Hippocampus cuda und Tinca tinca. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 78s234-60
von Ihering, R., 1935 Die wirkung von hypophyseninjektion auf den laichakt von fischen. Zool. Anz., 111:273-79
____1937, A method for inducing fish to spawn. Prog. Fish-Cult., 34:15-6
Wallace, R.A., 1978 Oocyte growth in non-mammalian vertebrates. In The vertebrate ovary, edited by R.E. Jones. New York, Plenum corporation, pp. 465-501
Wallace, R.A. and K. Selman, 1978 Oogenesis in Fundulus heteroclitus. 1. Preliminary observations on oocyte maturation in vivo and in vitro. Dev. Biol., 62:354-9
Weil, C., B. Breton and P. Reinaud, 1975 Étude de la résponse hypophysiare a l'administration de Gn-RH exogène au cours du cycle reproducteur annuel chez la carpe Cyprinus carpio L. C.R. Hebd. Séances Acad. Sci. Paris, (D), 280:2469-72
Weil, C. et al., 1978 Pituitary response to LH-RH at different Stages of gametogenesis in the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:863-9
Weisbart, M. and J.C. Fenwick, 1966 Effect of pinealectomy on osmotic and ionic regulation in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Am. Zool., 6:562 (Abstr.)
Whitehead, C. et al., 1978a The effects of alterations in photoperiod on ovarian developmental and spawning time in the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1035-43
____1978b, Effects of arrested photoperiod on serum gonadotrophin levels and spawning in female rainbow trout. J. Endocrinol., 79:29-30
Wiebe, J.P., 1968 The effects of temperature and daylength on the reproductive physiology of the viviparous seaperch, Cymatogaster aggregata Gibbons. Can. J. Zool., 46:1207-19
____1969, Endocrine controls of spermatogenesis and oogenesis in the viviparous seaperch Cymatogaster aggregata. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 12:267-75
Wiltzius, W.J., 1973 Selected bibliography on the collection, fertilization, vitality, storage and cryopreservation of gametes, particularly salmonids. Inf. Leafl. Colorado, Dep. Nat. Resour. Fish., (23):4 p.
Wingfield, J.C. and A.S. Grimm, 1977 Seasonal changes in plasma cortisol, testosterone and oestradiol-17ß in the plaice, Pleuronectes platessa L. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 31:1-11
Woynarovich, E. 1969 Techniques of hypophysation of common carp. Paper presented to the FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Induced Breeding of Cultivated Fishes. Calcutta-Cut tack-Bombay. 15 July - 18 August, 1969. Rome, FAO, FRI/IBCF/14:11 p.
Wurtman, R.J., J. Axelrod and D.E. Kelly, 1968 The pineal. New York, Academic Press, 199 p.
Yamamoto, K. and F. Yamazaki, 1967 Hormonal control of ovulation and spermiation in goldfish. Gunma. Symp. Endocrinol., 4:131-45
Yamazaki, F., 1962 Effects of hypophysectomy on the ovulation, oviposition and sexual behaviour in the goldfish, Carassius auratus. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 13:39-46
____1976, Application of hormones in fish culture. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33:948-58
Yamazaki, F. and E.M. Donaldson, 1968a The Spermiation of goldfish (Carassius auratus L.) as a bioassay for salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) gonadotropin. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 10:383-91
____1968b, The effects of partially purified salmon pituitary gonadotropin on spermatogenesis, vitellogenesis, and ovulation in hypophysectomized goldfish (Carassius auratus). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 11:292-9
____1969, Involvement of gonadotropin and steroid hormones in the spermiation of the goldfish. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 12:491-7
Yamazaki, F. and K. Watanabe, 1979 The role of steroid hormones in sex recognition during Spawning behaviour of the goldfish, Carassius auratus L. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. (B Biol. Sci.), 45:505-11
Yaron, Z., 1971 Observations on the granulosa cells of Acanthobrama terraesanctae and Tilapia nilotica (Teleostei). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 17:247-52
Yaron, Z. et al., 1977 Occurrence and biological activity of estradiol-17ß in the intact and ovariectomized Tilapia aurea (Cichlidae, Teleostei). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 33:45-52
Yashouv, A., 1969 Preliminary report on induced spawning of Mugil cephalus L. reared in captivity in freshwater ponds. Bamidgeh, 21:19-24
Yoneda, T. and F. Yamazaki, 1976 Purification of gonadotropin from chum salmon pituitary glands. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 42:343-50
Yoneda, Y., F. Yamazaki and Y. Ishihara, 1977 Amino acid composition of chum salmon gonadotropin. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish., 43:1451-1454
Yoshioka, H., 1962 On the effects of environmental factors upon the reproduction of fishes. 1. The effects of day-length on the reproduction of the Japanese killifish, Oryzias latipes. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 13:123-40
____1963, On the effects of environmental factors upon the reproduction of fishes, 2. Effects of short and long day-length on Oryzias latipes during the spawning season. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 14:137-71
Zambrano, D., 1970a The nucleus lateralis tuberis system of the gobiid fish Gillichthys mirabilis. 1. Ultrastructural and histochemical characterization of the nucleus. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 110:9-26
____1970b, The nucleus lateralis tuberis system of the gobiid fish Gillichthys mirabilis. 2. Innervation of the pituitary Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat., 110:496-516
____1971, The nucleus lateralis tuberis system of the gobiid fish Gillichthys mirabilis. 3. Functional modifications of the neurons and gonadotropic cells. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., 17:164-82
____1972, Innervation of the teleost pituitary. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol., Suppl. 3:22-31
Zell, S.R., 1978 Cryopreservation of gametes and embryos of salmonid fishes. Ann. Biol. Anim. Biochim. Biophys., 18:1089-99
<section>j</section>
Table I - A partial list of species selected for large-scale farming in the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America
Name of Species
Asia
Africa
Latin America
Salmo gairdneri
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Cyprinus carpio
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Ctenopharyngodon idella
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Aristichthys nobilis
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) nilotica
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) mossambica
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) aurea
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) rendalli (melanopleura)
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) hornorum
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) galilaea
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sarotherodon (Tilapia) macrochir
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Cichla ocellaris
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil cephalus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil tade
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil capito
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil saliens
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil curema
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Mugil incilis
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Chanos chanos
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Catla catla
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Cirrhina mrigala
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Labeo rohita
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Labeo coubie
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Labeo senegalensis
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Clarias batrachus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Clarias macrocephalus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Clarias lazera
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Pimelodus clarias
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Lates calcarifer
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Lates niloticus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Puntius javanicus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Ophiocephalus striatus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Heteropneustes fossilis
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Epinephelus tauvina
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Heterotis niloticus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Prochilodus reticulatus
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Brycon henni
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Brycon moorei
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Basilichthys bonariensis
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Micropterus salmoides
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
<section>k</section>
Table II - Bioassays used in evaluating the gonadotropic potency of pituitary extracts and fractions
No.
Assay
Test animal
Evaluation parameter
Reference
The Vy'un assay
(The Vy'un Unit)
Female loach,
Misgurnus fossilis
Spawning
Kazanskii (1949)
The spawning assay
(The Fish Unit)
Female curimata,
Prochilodus sp.
Spawning
Fontenele (1955)
The spawning assay
(Magur Unit)
Female catfish,
Clarias batrachus
Ovulation
Das and Khan (1962)
Frog spermiation assay
Male frog,
Rana temporaria
Spermiation: appearance of spermatozoa in cloaca
Stroganov and Alpator (1959),
Fontaine and Chauvel (1961)
Fish spermiation assay
Male goldfish,
Carassius auratus
Male hypophysectomized winter flounder,
Pseudopleuronectes americanus
Spermiation and free flow of milt
Spermiation and free flow of milt
Yamazaki and Donaldson (1968a)
Idler and Ng (1979)
Gonadal hydration assay
Female carp,
Cyprinus carpio and goldfish,
Carassius auratus
Hydration in ovaries
Clemens and Grant (1964)
Uptake of ^32P in testes say
The immature eel,
Anguilla anguilla
Incorporation of ^32P in the testes
Burzawa-Gérard and Fontaine (1965)
The ovulation and spawning assay
The hypophysectomized female gravid catfish,
Heteropneustes fossilis
Ovulation and spawning
Sundararaj and Goswami (1966a),
Sundararaj and Anand (1972)
The courtship behaviour and spawning assay
Gravid females of the puntius carp,
Puntius gonionotus
The silver carp,
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
The grass carp,
Ctenopharyngodon idellus
The common carp,
Cyprinus carpio and
The bighead carp,
Aristichthys nobilis
Courtship behaviour, ovulation and spawning
Sinha (1969, 1971)
Ovarian adenyl cyclase activity assay
The goldfish,
Carassius auratus
Increase in adenyl cyclase activity in ovarian homogenates
Fontaine, Burzawa-Gérard and Delerue-Labele (1970)
Immature carp ovarian cyclic 3', 5'-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic-AMP) production assay
The grass carp,
Ctenopharyngodon idella and
The rainbow trout,
Salmo gairdneri
Cyclic-AMP production
Idler, Hwang and Bazar (1975)
Chick testicular radio phosphate uptake assay
Day-old chick
Augmentation of ^32P uptake in testes
Donald son et al. (1972),
Idler, Bazar and Hwang (1975a)
Testicular uptake of radiophosphate and tritiated leucine and isotopic incorporation into proteins assay
Hypophysectomized male winter flounder,
Pseudopleuronectes americanus
Incorporation of radiolabels into proteins
Ng and Idler (1978 a, b)
Vitellogenic activity by the incorporation of radiolabels (H[3]^33PO[4] and ^14C-leucine) into lipophosphoprotein fraction of ovary assay
Hypophysectomized female winter flounder,
Pseudopleuronectes americanus
Incorporation of radiolabels into lipophosphoprotein fraction of ovary
Ng and Idler (1978b)
In vitro oocyte maturation assay
Eggs from frog
Rana temporaria
Germinal vesicle breakdown
Burzawa-Gérard, Goncharov and Fontaine (1975a)
In vivo oocyte maturation assay
Hypophysectomized female winter flounder
Pseudopleuronectes americanus
Peripheral migration of germinal vesicle and its breakdown
Ng and Idler (1978a)
