<title>ADCP/REP/81/15 - Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III</title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the major tasks of the newly established Regional Lead Centre for Integrated Fish Culture of the Asian Network of Aquaculture Centres is research on fish-livestock-crop farming. The analysis and rationalization of existing practices, investigation for a scientific understanding of traditional practices in China and experimental studies to evolve optimum levels of integration for high production, efficient utilization of resources and maximum benefit to farmers, are considered to be of great importance in the expansion of this type of farming. In order to render them suitable for adoption in other countries, the systems of integration as practised in China will have to be modified in respect of species of fish, crops and livestock to be raised, and the nature of operations adjusted to the motivation for integration. The research programme of the Lead Centre will therefore be directed to:
(i) the collection and critical analysis of experience in integrated fish culture in China and elsewhere;
(ii) collection of data on the availability of various forms of farm wastes and by-products suitable for use in the ponds of an integrated farm; and
(iii) experimental and observational research for the purpose of developing different models of integration suited to different agro-climatic and socio-economic conditions.
A task force consisting of the following members met in Wuxi to prepare an outline research programme for the Centre:
Madam Yang Xian-zhang
(China)
Prof. Lu Gui
(China)
Mr. Shan Jian
(China)
Mr. Hu Bao-tong
(China)
Mr, Yang Hua-zhu
(China)
Dr. G. Schroeder
(U.S.A.)
Dr. H. Buck
(U.S.A.)
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
(FAO)
Mr. Chen Foo Yan
(FAO)
Besides discussing the practices and problems of integrated farming with Chinese officials, scientists and extension workers, the task force also visited some typical integrated farms and consulted the farmers to ascertain their views on the role of scientific research in improving the efficiency of current practices.
In formulating the outline programme of research, the task force adopted a time frame of seven years (as in the case of all the other Lead Centres of the Asian Network), consisting of a two-year start-up period followed by a five-year period of concentrated research. Based on a review of the results achieved by the end of that period, a further programme of research will have to be outlined.
The task force has attempted only to outline the major studies to be carried out, the problems to be solved, and the research approaches to be followed. The detailed designs of experiments and observations are expected to be prepared by the research teams of the Centre with the help of consultants as required. Assistance of external consultants may be necessary to initiate some of the investigations, and at a later stage to evaluate the results or solve unexpected technical problems faced in the investigations.
The Centre has the necessary laboratory facilities and some of the specialized equipment for research will be provided through the FAO/UNDP Regional Project for the establishment of a Regional Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia. A farm of its own is being developed for experimental work, but it is expected that in the interim and even later the two large integrated fish farms in its neighbourhood (Ho Le Commune and Li Yuan Commune) can also be used for observational and experimental work through appropriate arrangements with the Communes/ Production Brigades concerned.
Initially the research staff of the Centre will consist of scientists of the Yangtze River Freshwater Fisheries Research Institute, who have been transferred to Wuxi. They cover the following areas of expertise:
- aquaculture
- limnology
- algology
- ichthyology
- genetics
- chemistry
- fish capture
As one of the major areas of research in the Centre will relate to pond dynamics and particularly mineralization of organic wastes, including the role of microbes and their effects on fish growth and health, it is essential to strengthen the staff with a micro-biologist, a fish physiologist and a biochemist.
<section>2</section>
2. BACKGROUND
Integration of fish culture with livestock and crop farming is an ancient practice in China. The concept of an 'all-round development of agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and other side-line occupations' widely adopted in modern China has resulted in different patterns of integration throughout the country. This is probably the most impressive aspect of Chinese aquaculture and of considerable value to other countries, particularly developing countries interested in integrated rural development.
The major species used in integrated fish farming in China are herbivores and omnivores, especially carps and tilapias. In some countries, experimental work is now underway to determine the possible use of the freshwater prawn Macrobrachium rosenbergii, but this is still in an early stage of development. In most cases the farmers in the region use a polyculture system. In China up to nine species are used, but elsewhere much fewer species and even monoculture of omnivorous tilapia is common. Even though it is generally believed that a polyculture system is more efficient in ponds receiving heavy organic manuring, it has yet to be established that the large number of species used are necessary or essential to maintain a balanced pond environment and to achieve the desired fish yield. The problems of raising enough fry and fingerlirigs of a large number of species, and indeed the consumer acceptance of some of them, may limit the development of this type of farming in some
countries.
In China the animal commonly raised in association with fish ponds is the pig. The manure of pig is considered as important a product as the meat. Pigsties are often built on pond dikes to facilitate the application of manure, either directly or after fermentation. One pig is estimated to give about 3 500 kg of manure slurry. Empirical ratios of the number of pigs to be raised to pond area as adopted in China range from 15 to 45 pigs per ha, but the optimum ratios in relation to the capacity of the pond to mineralize the manure, under different temperature conditions have yet to be determined.
Other animals raised on integrated farms are ducks, cattle, sheep and chicken. It is estimated that 20 000 ducks produce 1 000 tons of manure per year and a cow 50 kg daily. It is reported that a Huzhou sheep produces enough manure each year to supply all the nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium needed for 1 mu^1 of mulberry. This in turn not only feeds silkworms in the season but provides enough autumn leaves to feed a sheep all winter. Silkworms hatching from each sheet of eggs can produce 200 kg of excreta, sufficient to feed 25 kg of fish. In some of the Chinese farms all these animals are raised in accordance with the policy of diversified production. However, the economic efficiency of raising different animals and their role in integration may differ. Specific information in this regard will be necessary in making selection of animals for farming in other countries.
1 mu = 0.066 ha (1/15 ha) = 0.165 acres
The dikes and adjacent land in integrated farms are often used for growing fodder. The fodder is fed to the grass carp, but it is known that a part of the fodder is excreted undigested or partly digested and this also serves as manure for fertilizing the pond water. It is believed that 1 kg grass carp can produce sufficient manure to raise 0.5 kg of silver carp and bighead. Grass left unconsumed by fish will also become manure. Besides grass, pond dikes and farmland are often used in China for growing vegetables, corn, bananas, rice, wheat and mulberry. Wastes from all these plants are used as feed or fertilizer. The mixture of water and fertilizer that runs off from mulberry plots into ponds acts as efficient fertilizers for promoting growth of plankton. Corn, rice, and wheat are considered as the main supplementary feeds for fish. Generally the bran and broken grains are used to feed fish and livestock. Mulberry leaves are used for silkworm production, but a considerable
amount of wastes (up to 18 000 kg of wastes per ha) can be obtained for use as fertilizer or feed in ponds. Silkworm pupae are used as a direct supplementary feed. Fruit trees and vegetables appear to make marginal contributions to the food and fertilizer resources of ponds.
The main contribution that fish ponds make to the productivity of integrated farms in China is in the form of silt or pond deposits, which are generally removed every year and used as fertilizer for land crops. The droppings of fish may enrich the silt. About 75 000 kg of silt may be obtained per year from a ha of pond, and silt is considered to be a high quality fertilizer. According to one estimate silt from 1 mu of pond can be used as a base fertilizer for 2 mu of rice fields. In pond manuring experiments elsewhere, not much deposit of silt has been observed when manuring is done on a daily basis. The rate of deposit of silt under different manuring practices, its composition and the effect of its partial or total removal from the pond bottom, have yet to be evaluated.
Heavy manuring, dense stocking with several species, multiple stocking and harvesting together with supplemental feeding, have produced phenomenal yields of up to 22 tons/ha under Chinese conditions. A large volume of empirical knowledge has accumulated on the practices involved. However, a clearer knowledge of the pond dynamics has to be obtained, including a definition of the pathways which convert relatively crude organic inputs into fish. The relative nutrient values of animal and plant wastes have also to be determined. The composition of manures may depend on the food that the animals eat. The role of microbes in the mineralization of wastes and their subsequent effects on the production and composition of plankton and other benthic organisms, are not clearly known. The relative importance of these organisms, including the bacteria as direct fish food, is also not clearly known. The role of the pond bottom, especially in the 2 to 3 m deep ponds in China, needs to be
studied with special reference to the soil-water interface in order to rationalize manuring practices. In other countries shallower ponds are generally used. It may be that in deeper ponds photosynthesis will be limited to the upper layer which in turn may affect overall productivity. Comparative studies will be necessary to establish optimum depth and size of ponds and water management methods for efficient utilization of wastes.
The use of aerators is fairly widespread in China. The role of different types of aerators in deep and in shallow, waste-laden and densely stocked ponds needs to be studied, to determine their economic efficiencies.
The frequency and methods of manuring adopted in China differ in many respects from those of other countries. Although washings from pigsties, cow sheds and chicken pens used to be applied directly into ponds, the present practice in most areas is to ferment them for 10 to 15 days before application. Manuring is generally done only at such intervals (10 to 15 days) and the quantity applied can generally be controlled. The efficiency of this method compared to the general practice of direct daily application of fresh manure needs to be verified. Presently, about 225 000 kg of manure slurry is applied to a hectare of pond, containing about 11 250 kg of fish. In Wuxi area, the general practice is to apply 60 percent of the estimated total manure required from January to May, when the water temperature ranges from 5°C to 25°C, and the remaining 40 percent in the period of June to September at a water temperature range of 20 C to 30°C. Multiple harvesting and stocking are
practised during the later part of the growing period (June to September). The rationale behind this practice has to be investigated in order to determine the optimum quantities of different manures to be applied in the most suitable form and the best method of application at different temperatures, oxygen concentrations and BOD. Many farmers report that despite all improvements, including the use of aerators, production through manuring alone reaches a plateau after a certain stage, and further increases are possible only through feeding. This would indicate the need for formulating and preparing suitable supplementary feeds, preferably based on ingredients produced on the farm.
While discussing with farmers and commune officials, one is struck by the amount of data that have accumulated. Even though they may be rather empirical, it would appear that they may prove adequate for a preliminary modelling exercise which could be refined or modified when experimental data become available. Such models may help in making general recommendations on the nature and extent of integration that can be adopted under different agro-climatic and socio-economic conditions. Intensive fish farming is often associated with risks of disease, resulting in large-scale mortality. However, from local interviews it is reported that there are no observed differences in the occurrence of diseases between integrated and non-integrated fish farms. It will be most useful to verify this and to determine whether the use of animal and plant wastes cause any public health hazards through the transmission of pathogenic organisms.
A major objective of integrated fish culture is to reduce operating costs and maximize the farmer's income. The newly established integrated fish farm of Ho Le Commune in Wuxi clearly shows how overall production and income can be progressively increased. In five years, after its establishment in 1975, the farm has increased its fish production almost nine times and the production of pigs, chicken, ducks, eggs and milk, three to five times. (The farm, with a total area of 77 ha has 67 ha of fish ponds, 1 650 pigs, 20 000 ducks, 100 cows and 8 000 chickens.). The total income in 1980 was Yuan 2.6 million^1, out of which Yuan 950 000 was obtained by sale of fish. Production is planned in such a way as to reflect a balance between the output of fish and other products. The average income of an ordinary farmer was Yuan 1 000 per head per year and of the managerial staff, Yuan 1 600, which is much above the average income in this area.
The productivity of manpower is reported to be greatly enhanced through integrated farming. In Wuxi area One man can look after 2 640 m^2 to 3 300 m^2 of fish ponds and produce 1 500 to 2 000 kg of fish, whereas On a non-integrated farm one man can manage only 990 m^2 of fish pond and produce about 750 kg of fish.
Economic data of the type indicated above together with detailed cost and earnings data will be needed to determine the benefits Of different types of integrated farming.
<section>3</section>
3. RESEARCH NEEDS
Based on information collected in the field as summarized above, the task force identified major research requirements for establishing a better scientific understanding of the various physico-chemical and biological processes which interact with fish in waste-laden ponds in integrated farms. Research into fish yield in relation to these processes as well as to stocking density and stocking ratios is therefore necessary. The economics of production of various crops, and the economic relationships in an integrated farm with fish as the main produce, have also to be incorporated into the research programme and evaluated under different patterns of integration. The understanding of such inter-relationship is of primary importance if the technology of integrated fish farming is to be adopted in other areas having different environmental and socio-economic conditions.
1 U.S.$ 1 = Yuan 1.55
As manure is the major factor controlling fish production in an integrated fish farm, research effort will be concentrated on its utilization and management, using fish yield and economic benefit as its functions. Waste in the form of manure from sideline occupations, e.g., silk processing, will not be included in the proposed research programme since it is not expected to play a major contributory role in promoting fish production in integrated farms to be developed elsewhere. Similarly, research into the use of sewage from such farms for fish production is also omitted for the same reason.
Based on these criteria, the following priority areas of research are proposed:
(i) Comparative studies on the effects of fresh and fermented animal manure on fish yield.
(ii) Comparative studies on the effects of different livestock feeds on the nature and efficiency of manure for fish production.
(iii) Comparative studies on the performance of different livestock manures in relation to fish production.
(iv) Relationship between organic and chemical composition of animal manure and fish yield.
(v) Establishment of a standard procedure for manure application including frequency, rate, and method of application for increased fish production.
(vi) Comparative studies on the effects of fresh and composted green manure on fish yield.
(vii) Comparative studies on the effects of different types of green manure on fish production.
(viii) Studies on the relative values of green manure and animal manure on fish production.
(ix) Comparative studies on the performance of treated and untreated straw on fish growth.
(x) Water quality and pond dynamics studies for establishing an upper limit of manure quantum which could be 'safely' added to fish ponds under different environmental conditions.
(xi) Studies on the effects of manuring on fish health and sanitation.
(xii) Studies on the physico-chemical and biological effects of silt on fish and crop production.
(xiii) Studies on stocking densities and stocking ratios of fish in manured ponds.
(xiv) Studies on the relationship between size and depth of manured ponds and fish yield.
(xv) Development of supplementary fish diets from agriculture wastes of integrated farms.
(xvi) Comparative studies on the economics of dual and multiple integration of crops, aimed at establishing models for various integrated farming systems.
(xvii) Observational studies of various systems of integrated farming as practised in China for initial planning of models.
<section>4</section>
4. RESEARCH PROBLEMS
4.1 Organic waste inputs
4.2 Fish species for culture
4.3 Water quality
4.4 Pond dynamics
4.5 Role of pond silt
4.6 Pond design
4.7 Fish disease and mortality
4.8 Fish as carriers of pathogens
4.9 Supplemental feeds
4.10 Economic modelling
The problems of research on integrated fish culture cover different disciplines concerned with crop, livestock and fish production. Obviously the Wuxi Centre cannot undertake research on all aspects. As indicated earlier the focus of studies has to be on fish culture. Since the main contributions of crop and livestock farming to fish culture are fish food and fertilizer and contribution of fish ponds to the rest of the farm is pond silt as fertilizer for crops and fodder plants, attention has to be directed toward the role of various farm products and wastes and the inter-relation between crops, livestock and fish. The Centre has to keep close liaison with relevant institutions doing research on crops and livestock and utilize the results of their studies as appropriate for both the design of experiments and interpretation of results.
4.1 Organic waste inputs
4.1.1. Animal manure
4.1.2 Green manure
4.1.3 High fibre content substrates
4.1.1. Animal manure
(i) Comparative studies of the use of fresh and stored-fermented manure
There exist among fish farmers of different countries conflicting opinions as to the economic and other benefits of storing manure prior to its application to the pond. Fresh manure contains a complement of chemical and organic components with fermentation, inherent in storage, partly deletes. This loss is due to the natural inevitable production of biogas during storage. Whether or not the biogas (the main energy constituent is methane, CH[4]) produced during anaerobic storage and fermentation of manure is utilized, there is, during this storage-fermentation: (1) an inherent decrease of carbon; (2) an increase in ash; and (3) quite probably a loss of some volatile nitrogen compounds in the residual sludge and supernatant relative to the fresh manure. These three factors may result in lower fish yields per unit of available manure. However, benefits may accrue with fermentation. Biogas is produced; the fibres of the original manure may be partly digested and thus made more
available for natural food production in the pond.
By selecting a given polyculture of fish capable of utilizing the range of natural foods believed to be abundant in manured ponds, a given moderately high stocking density, and a given type or source of manure, the production of fish in ponds receiving fresh manure and manure stored for specified periods (e.g., 15 days) will be compared. Relative yields of fish for these manuring systems will be measured. In conjunction with this, the potential value of biogas which might be obtained by fermentation will be considered in relation to the costs and labour involved in fermentation and biogas production. These data will permit an overall economic evaluation of the effectiveness and desirability of using fresh and stored manure for fish production.
The actual experiments can be performed at the Wuxi Lead Centre. Ponds of equal area and depth of approximately 400 m^2, provide an adequate indication of what can be expected in larger commercial ponds. The smaller experimental ponds permit concurrent replications of selected pond treatments with considerably less investment in space and labour than would be required in larger ponds.
During these and other experiments, the full range of studies of pond dynamics, water quality, fish survival, fish disease, organic and chemical composition of the manure, etc., as discussed in later sections, will be conducted as an integral part of the programme. This multidisciplinary approach maximizes the range of data obtainable from each experiment, thus reducing cost and effort for achieving the overall goals of the Lead Centre. The interdisciplinary approach demands of scientists and technicians the utmost cooperation and consideration of each others' efforts.
(ii) Fish yield as a function of the type of manure
It may often be possible to grow a variety of animals on an integrated farm. However, the market demand and price for specific animals differs greatly from region to region. The effectiveness of various manures as substrates for growth of natural fish foods, and hence contribution to fish yield is likely not the same for all animals. The farmer on an integrated farm must select the combination of animals and fish that will give him the optimum total return on his efforts. Thus he must know what combined production of land animals and fish he can expect for a given feed input to the land animal.
To gain the necessary data to formulate this integrated animal-fish yield model, experiments in ponds will be conducted using a standardized polyculture suitable for manured ponds, with moderately high fish stocking density. Manures from pigs, cows, ducks and chickens will be used. If the number of available ponds permits, the animal manures will be tested concurrently with replications. If enough ponds are not available, the studies will be sequential with care taken to consider climatic differences during test periods. Fish and animal production will be correlated for each type of combination with total inputs of animal feed, labour and land utilization by ponds and pens. Manure production rate for each type of animal will also be measured.
As stated above, interdisciplinary studies will be conducted during all pond experiments. Each pond should yield data on a wide variety of aspects (pond dynamics, fish disease etc.), all of which benefit from this integrated experimental approach.
(iii) Fish yield as a function of land animal feed
The quality of a manure reflects, to some extent, the quality of the feed supplied to the animal. Since fish yield will be dependent upon the inputs to the pond, the combined fish-animal yield varies with changes in the land animal's diet. The type of feeds used differ very considerably among the climatic and economic environments of the countries served by the Wuxi Lead Centre.
To better understand the effect of feed on manure quality and potential fish production, the above described experiments using pig, cow, duck and chicken manures will be repeated using typical, animal feeds available to integrated farmers, ranging from high to low quality.
As previously mentioned, the range of dynamics of the manure-pond interactions will be studied.
(iv) Composition of manure and its relation to fish yield
Throughout the above experiments, the composition of the manure will be monitored. The parameters measured will include: manure biological oxygen demand or BOD (1 day at 30°C and also at local pond temperature), ammonia, Kjeldahl nitrogen, phosphate or phosphorous, potassium, percent dry matter (dried to constant weight at 70 to 100°C), percent volatile matter (combusted at 550°C in a muffle furnace). The volatile matter is a good indicator of the total organic substrate available for a microbial, heterotrophic food web. From time to time, measurements of lignin, crude fibre, not including lignin, and total fibre (crude fibre, lignin, hemicellulose) should be made. These measurements may be done at a feed analysis laboratory since they are not frequent.
The manure analysed in these studies will be from the yield experiments conducted at Wuxi Lead Centre. Comparison of the data describing composition of the manures with the measured fish yields from these experiments may show a correlation which will enable us to construct a model relating some features of manure composition to expected fish yield per unit quantity of the manure. This model, if it can be formulated, will permit the evaluation of a proposed integrated animal-fish or crop-animal-fish farm without the costly and time-consuming effort of actual pond experiments.
(v) Manure application and fish yields
There are differences of opinion on the most Suitable procedure for application of manure in fish ponds. It is believed that frequent applications, distributed over large areas of the pond surface, provide a uniform input of substrate for growth of natural fish foods. However, this requires special equipment and more effort than does application once in 10 days at one or only a few locations in the pond. The relative benefit of these approaches, such as saving of labour and increased fish yield must be quantitatively evaluated.
Because distribution cannot be realistically simulated in small ponds, these studies should be conducted on commercial commune ponds, preferably in the vicinity of the Lead Centre.
The distribution systems to be studied include:
(a) amount of manure/unit weight of fish biomass, e.g., kg manure (measured as dry organic matter)/kg fish
(b) frequency of manuring, e.g., once per day; once per week; once per 15 days
(c) distribution over pond, e.g., pile the manure in one or two locations; distribute by boat over most of the pond; distribute from one or two banks or through the water inlet.
(vi) Safe dosages of manure
Fish kill by anoxia, or loss of fish growth by low dissolved oxygen (DO), are two major risks in integrated farming. The oxygen demand of the manure uses pond DO. The mineral-chemical components of the manure stimulate phytoplankton growth. Phytoplankton produce oxygen during the day, but consume it during the night. Appropriate polyculture of fish can contribute to balanced growth of plankton. Changes in the DO cycle of a manured pond should be measured as a function of: manure BOD, fish polyculture, fish stocking density, pond temperature, and insolation (sunlight).
For all the above manure-fish yield experiments, the BOD of the added manure, pond temperature, and DO cycles will be monitored. From these data and the fish polyculture and fish density, correlations between the effects of given amounts of manure on pond DO, for specific pond condition (temperature, polyculture, density) will be sought. If such a relationship is found, safe amounts of manure can be recommended for given pond conditions.
Some researchers have found that BOD of fresh manure closely correlates with dry organic matter content of the manure. It this is consistent with data obtained in the Wuxi Lead Centre, then the easily measured parameter of dry matter percent may serve as an indicator of the manure BOD and hence as an indicator of the effect that the particular manure will have on a pond's DO regime.
(vii) Number of animals per unit area of pond
From the above experiments, the total amount of various types of manure that can be safely added to a unit area of pond will be derived. The manure production rate of pigs, cows, ducks and chickens on varied diets will also be measured. From these data, useful guidelines on the number of animals that can supply the required quantity Of manure to a given pond area (taking temperature, seasonal cloudiness and rain, fish polyculture and stocking density, animal feed quality, into account) will be derived. This will allow the integrated farmer to plan his fish pond-animal integration accordingly.
4.1.2 Green manure
The input of green manure, or green fodder, is of obvious benefit in integrated fish farming, utilizing polycultures of a large variety of species, but: (1) its relative value as compared to animal manure; (2) benefit derived from its direct use as food; and (3) its influence as a manure in the production of natural foods (bacteria, protozoans, plankton, benthos, etc.), are not clearly known. Studies should be made of: (1) the relative value of green manure versus animal manures; (2) the relative value of various types of green manure (grass, vegetable tops, etc.); (3) their direct utilization as food, compared to their use as a manure; and (4) their relative value when applied fresh or when applied after composting.
4.1.3 High fibre content substrates
(i) Treatment to increase digestibility
Substrates with high fibre content are often available in fair quantities in integrated farms. These substrates include among others rice straw, wheat straw and sugar cane waste (bagasse).
The cellulose of these substrates is often lined with lignin. This greatly reduces the rate at which these fibres can be digested by bacteria. Chopping the straw and partially hydrolysing it with weak sodium hydroxide (NaOH) has been reported to more than double the digestibility of straw in a cow's rumen. Since the processes in a pond may be similar to those in a rumen, treatment of these high-fibre substances may make them more useful as organic inputs to ponds.
To investigate the usefulness of the treatment, standard digestibility tests will be performed on treated and untreated samples of rice and wheat straws and on sugar cane waste. Treatment will consist of chopping the straw to 0.5 to 1 cm long pieces and moistening with 1 percent NaOH solution for 1 to 4 days at ambient temperatures and at 25°C.
Digestibility tests will be used to determine the available energy per unit weight as a function of original lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose. These tests will be conducted in vitro.
(ii) Fish growth in ponds with treated straw substrates
The effect of treated straws on fish growth can be measured in small ponds or large out-of-door tanks. Development of microbial growth on treated and untreated straws (bacteria, protozoa, nannoplankton) should be monitored. Straw contains low amounts of nitrogen and phosphate. These must be supplemented with chemical fertilizers to raise the C:N:P to approximately 20:1:0.5, which is considered good for microbial growth.
4.2 Fish species for culture
The Chinese experience has led to the use of polycultures containing as many as 8 or 9 compatible species having diverse food habits. It is not clear, however, whether such a practice has developed because it is significantly more productive than a polyculture containing fewer species. An efficient population must contain fishes that feed in all niches and consume the available foods. It is possible, however, that: (1) similar rate of production might be achieved using a fewer number of appropriate species; and (2) that the disadvantages of producing fewer species might be outweighed by the savings in cost and labour of producing, stocking, managing, harvesting, and distributing a greater number of species. In areas where the low-cost production of protein is more important than the variety of protein foods, it might be more efficient to produce fewer species, provided no significant loss in production or consumer acceptance is caused.
It is recommended that experiments be conducted to compare the efficiencies of monoculture, polyculture of 2 to 4 species, and polyculture of 6 to 9 fish species, as practised in China. For monoculture an omnivore or a species that feeds at several trophic levels Should be used. A possible choice in Wuxi would be tilapia. In limited polyculture, the available feeding niches would seem to be filled by a combination of silver carp, bighead carp, common carp, and tilapia. The ratio of species in such experimental populations should be standardized. For example, it might contain 20 percent silver carp with the remaining 80 percent being allotted to common carp and tilapia. The multispecies Chinese polyculture could include silver carp, bighead carp, tilapia, grass carp, Chinese bream, and common carp. This multispecies approach would require testing in ponds receiving animal manure only, and a combination of animal and green manure. For all the tests a standard stocking density,
e.g., about 10 000 fish/ha, would be used. In ponds receiving animal plus green manure an increased density might also be tried to take advantage of the increased organic input.
4.3 Water quality
Water quality should be monitored as a function of the various manure and polyculture treatments. Regular measurement should be made of important physico-chemical parameters.
(i) Physico-chemical parameters
Because of the importance of dissolved oxygen (DO) in manured ponds, this parameter should receive special attention. To better understand the DO regimes of the ponds, dissolved oxygen and temperature might be measured at several selected depth intervals at dawn, mid-morning and dusk several times each week. These data could be augmented by measuring over a 24-hour cycle the dissolved oxygen, temperature and pH. The following additional parameters should be measured weekly to give a more complete description of the pond chemistry: pond depth, pH, CO[2], alkalinity, BOD, ammonia, nitrates, nitrites, and sodium orthophosphate.
Conductivity, hardness, suspended solids and settleable solids could be measured less frequently, possibly once each 21 or 30 days.
The seasonal cycle of pond water temperatures at just below the pond surface and at the pond bottom should be recorded in at least one large and one small pond.
Unless recorded elsewhere in the Wuxi area, continuous daily records should be kept of air temperature, cloud cover or (incidence of sunlight) wind velocity, humidity and rainfall.
At some point, an evaluation should be made of the effect of different types of aeration on water quality and fish production in waste-laden ponds.
A concerted effort should be made to identify or develop a reliable method, either chemical or biological, for indicating critical levels of dissolved oxygen. A biological method might utilize an indicator organism, such as a fish or a prawn, which would show distress at a higher level of dissolved oxygen than the cultured species. Additional possibilities might include: (1) quantities of phaeophytin as an indicator of senescence in the phytoplankton population; or (2) measures of chlorophyll-A, phytoplankton density, or level of organic nitrogen as indicators of high levels of oxygen demand.
(ii) Biological parameters
Phytoplankton and zooplankton population should be monitored in order to identify the species compositions and densities of populations occurring in ponds receiving different experimental treatments. Only limited measurements of primary production are recommended, but the phytoplankton communities should be characterized by measurements of phytoplankton densities, phytopigment concentrations, and by identifications and counts of the dominant species. It is recommended that: (1) phytoplankton study be made from no less than duplicate samples from each pond, that samples be collected at least bi-weekly or tri-weekly; and (2) that each sample contains depth-integrated water from the surface to the bottom of the euphotic zone.
The zooplankton communities should also be sampled bi-weekly or tri-weekly so that the relative densities of the major components (Cladocerans, copepods and rotifers) can be identified and related to other pond parameters. It is sometimes useful to measure species diversity of both phyto- and zooplankton as indicators of water quality. High species diversities of both types of plankton commonly reflect the good health of the community, whereas low species diversity may reflect stress, either from predation or poor water quality.
In making quantitative studies of plankton communities, pull-nets or cast-nets are of limited value since the quantity of water that passes through the net (e.g., prior to the net plugging) is uncertain. More precise is the technique of passing measured volumes of water (e.g., from a 10-litre pail) through screen nets of selected openings such as 37 microns (400 mesh) and 150 microns (100 mesh) to retain mainly phytoplankton and nauplii and zooplankton, respectively. Even with a 37 micron screen, about 90 percent of the phytoplankton pass through. Assessment of total phytoplankton requires a paper filter (Whatman No. 1 is usually adequate) and chlorophyll-A analyses.
4.4 Pond dynamics
The processes which convert manure into fish food have received considerable attention. The pond is a highly complex system. The temptation has been to measure many variables, usually with disappointing results. At the Lead Centre emphasis should be placed on rates of processes rather than measuring standing stocks of plankters and microbes. This implies attempts to decipher the energy flow within the pond.
The manure supplies chemicals for phytoplankton (autotrophs) growth and fibre substrate for a bacteria-protozoa (heterotroph) food web. Most of the past studies have concentrated on the plankton. Evidence is mounting that the bacteria-protozoa food web may be dominant in manured ponds. Rates of production of these micro-organisms and factors controlling these rates should be investigated. In addition, chemical transfer across the pond bottom-water interface should be studied. The attempt will be to identify the sites of food production in the manured pond and to learn how the pond environment can be modified to increase the number of sites or the productivity of the existing sites, so that the present limits of fish production based on manuring can be raised.
4.5 Role of pond silt
Silt taken from manured pond bottoms has traditionally been used as a fertilizer for field crops. The fertility of a pond is also thought to be related to the silt content of the bottom. Because of the considerable effort expended in silt removal, it would be useful to know quantitatively what the value of silt removal is to the pond and the value of silt application to a field.
Using the investigative approaches outlined above, the following will be studied:
(i) Biological and chemical processes at the pond bottom interface when the silt is present and after it is removed.
(ii) Effects of partial and total removal of silt on fish yield.
(iii) Effectiveness of silt as a fertilizer for land crops as compared with inorganic chemical fertilizers and manure. (It is understood that extensive experiments have been carried out by Agricultural Research Stations in China. The results of their work will be collected by the Centre.).
(iv) Chemical (content of N, P, K) or organic (amount of volatile matter) indicators of the quality of the silt as a fertilizer or a pond bottom substrate.
(v) Rate of production of silt as a function of manuring rate and fish stocking of a pond.
4.6 Pond design
In view of differences of opinion on the optimum depth of ponds, and because of economic considerations inherent in pond construction, it is important to determine the relative productivity of ponds having depths in the range of 1.0-1.5 m, and those as deep as 2.5 m, found in China. Deeper ponds may well be necessary and justified in polyculture of several species, but may not be necessary in monocultures. Similarly, densely stocked and waste-laden ponds would need aerators for successful operations. It is necessary to determine these through appropriate experiments and observations.
Similarly, the influence of pond area is not sufficiently known, and should be investigated.
4.7 Fish disease and mortality
There is the possibility that the incidence of disease, or the mortality of fish due either to disease or loss of oxygen may be related to rates of manuring of ponds. In the course of the above described experiments records will be maintained of the incidence of disease and the rates of fish mortality in ponds receiving both animal and green manure. Analysis of the data related to incidence of disease and rates of mortality can include the total fish stocking density as well as the number of species in the particular experimental pond.
4.8 Fish as carriers of pathogens
There is some possibility that handling or consumption of fish raised in integrated farms may cause certain health hazards. Studies should therefore be made of the incidence of bacteria, parasites and other potential pathogens (both external and internal) on the fresh carcasses of fish raised in waste-laden ponds. It is increasingly believed that the manured pond represents a hostile environment in which many potential pathogens cannot survive. If true, time may be a factor in their reduction or elimination. It is therefore recommended that such examination be made just prior to the harvesting and marketing of fish. Pond workers are regularly exposed to the organisms of the pond environment. Selected patheno-genic organisms in the water and on the pond bottom should also be monitored at regular intervals after filling the pond and after manuring.
4.9 Supplemental feeds
It is a common practice in integrated fish farming to utilize so-called fine feeds, grass, certain aquatic plants, vegetable tops, and silkworm pupae as supplemental foods for fish. Such a practice not only involves a great deal of time and labour, but may not represent the most efficient use of such foods. It is possible that such available wastes or by-products could be formulated into a pelleted feed of high nutritional value. Such a properly formulated diet may promote faster fish growth, and be simpler to distribute. It is recommended that the formulation of such feeds using ingredients raised on integrated farms be undertaken by the Regional Lead Centre.
4.10 Economic modelling
Perhaps the main reason for integrating fish farming with land animal husbandry and crop farming is the economic consequence that such integration will have on total farm production.
The entire range of the above experiments should be so designed as to provide the necessary data to construct an economic model of an integrated farm. The model will take into account specific local social, climatic, nutritional and economic conditions, and based on relations that will have been derived relating manure type and rate to fish yield, the model will project optimum allocation of available land area and labour among fish ponds, field crops and poultry or animal husbandry.
Specifically, combinations of fish-animal-crop (pig, cow, duck, chicken, wheat, rice, vegetable) and fish-animal (pig, cow, duck, chicken) will be dealt with. In the model, the weighting of actual values of each (the nutritional value of the food itself and the market value) and the interactive values (manure to the pond; silt to the field; crop waste to the pond) will be variable to satisfy the specific conditions of the regions served by the Wuxi Lead Centre.
<section>5</section>
5. RESEARCH APPROACHES
5.1 Collection and analysis of existing data
5.2 Tanks and yard-scale experiments
5.3 Studies of animal manures
5.4 Studies of green manure
5.6 Straw and other high-fibre substrates
5.7 Fish stock and stocking rates
5.8 Silt and pond bottom studies
5.9 Experimental studies and economic evaluations
The approaches that could be adopted for investigating the problems that were described earlier, are discussed below. In suggesting approaches, the task force took into account the facilities available in Wuxi, the manpower allotted and the time frame of UNDP/FAO assistance to the Centre.
5.1 Collection and analysis of existing data
It is understood that several communes in China have detailed records of farming and production. These data can provide a valuable base for planning specific details of the Lead Centre's experiments and for evaluating the results of experimental work as extrapolated to commercial production. Efforts should be made to collect and review these records, and if the nature of the data warrant it, appropriate analysis should be undertaken to derive preliminary indications of relationships and production rates. Commune records Should be examined for information of the following types:
- Stocking ratios and densities
- Organic inputs
- Fish yields
- Yields in relation to pond depth and area
- Yields in relation to supplemental feeding
- Economic value or productivity, and labour for crop, animal or fish farming
- Occurrence and effects of fish disease
- Mortality rates of fishes
- Pond management (aeration, water replacement, etc.)
- Silt removal, and its use and value
It will also be useful to collect similar information from other locations within and outside of China so that yields at Wuxi may be compared with methods and climatic conditions existing elsewhere. The computer facilities to be installed at the Wuxi Lead Centre should prove a valuable tool in this data analysis. Meteorological data, e.g., the ratio of cloudy to sunny days, may have major impact on pond ecology, water quality, and fish yields. Such data, if not available at the commune or fish farm level, may be attainable from local governmental meteorological stations.
An analysis of available information may provide guidelines for experimental designs, as well as permitting essential economic evaluations.
5.2 Tanks and yard-scale experiments
It is seldom possible to have sufficient ponds to meet the needs of individual investigators in a research centre to enable each to work independently. Because of this and more importantly the interaction and interdependence of factors in culture systems, it is important that investigations are carried out by multidisciplinary teams, whenever necessary. This will require careful consideration of the variables involved and how each experimental system can be used to provide a variety of types of information. Certain types of data such as related to water quality, incidence of disease and pathogens, and pond dynamics, can be gathered concurrently with most of the experiments for evaluating the types and rates of waste application.
Certain types of preliminary studies can be conducted in small tanks or pools, either indoor, or outdoor. An example of such an application would be the evaluation of treated or hydrolysed straw against untreated straw (see page 16) where the test animal might be a tilapia, a prawn or both. Such a preliminary evaluation could be made in indoor tanks. Comparative studies of green manure and animal manure, or of pig manure and chicken manure, might also be conducted in small tanks or pools. In this case the tests should be made outdoors because sunlight would be an important part of the equation. When applicable, the use of pools or tanks can provide savings in time and money because pools and tanks are less expensive, and require less space than ponds, and can indicate what additional testing in ponds is needed. The use of pools can also: (1) permit a greater replication of trials, which can increase the reliability of the results; (2) provide a greater uniformity among
experimental systems; and (3) be more easily and reliably sampled than larger ponds. It must be recognized, however, that the use of such systems has disadvantages which limit their use. For example, they represent an artificial environment which may alter the growth rates and feeding activities of the species stocked. However, it has been reported by several researchers that tilapia, small carps, or prawns, in limited numbers, can achieve sufficient growth in outdoor pools of 3 or 4 m diameter to permit a reliable interpretation of experimental treatments.
Obviously, the inputs of manures and/or substrate, and the numbers of fish stocked in such systems are to be carefully standardized and calibrated. For example, in order to ensure growth capability, the numbers of small tilapia stocked in a 4-m diameter pool receiving supplemental food should not exceed about 30 individuals, although either the number stocked, or the growth potential, could be increased by use of a small aerator. Every input must be carefully standardized. All experimental animals (fish or prawns) should be of the same initial size and condition, and the input of manure or substrate should be uniform to all tanks. It is suggested that soil and silt layers on pool bottoms should have a uniform thickness of at least 3 cm. Successful experiments have been conducted in such pools constructed of fibreglass, or having a relatively thin, inert plastic liner. It should be emphasized that the principal value of such testing is to determine whether the procedures
under examination exhibit sufficient promise to warrant additional evaluation in ponds.
5.3 Studies of animal manures
Manure compositions vary over such a wide range that some pre-selection of the types should be done prior to pond experiments.
Manures from pigs, cows, ducks and chickens receiving high, medium, and low quality feeds should be analysed for nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, true protein, total fibre, lignin and pepsin digestible energy (pepsin and lignin give about the same results). A high quality chicken feed contains approximately 3 000 calories available energy/gram, 20 percent protein, 10 to 15 percent fish meal or soybean meal plus sulphur-bearing amino acid supplement, and less than 10 percent ash. Lower quality feeds contain less energy, less protein, and more ash and fibre.
The composition of the various manures will indicate the range of inputs that can be expected in fish ponds in an integrated farm. Since it will not be practical to pond test all manure compositions for fish growth, yard-scale experiments in outdoor tanks should be conducted. Although fish growth rates in tanks are usually quite different from growth rates observed in ponds, relative growth rates of fish in the several tank tests will indicate which of the manures should be investigated in pond trials.
Methods for the calibrating, handling and distribution of manures to be used in ponds must also be carefully developed. While the additions will be calibrated on a dry weight basis, they will have to be placed in the ponds, or in the fermenter or composter, when fresh, and the amounts must be carefully monitored. In some cases it may prove desirable to hold the pigs, or other experimental animals, in such a position that their total manure falls or flows directly and continuously into the pond. In this case it would be necessary to take frequent weights of the animals so that manure production could be calculated on the basis of their weight. Such a procedure should be acceptable for experiments in ponds over a growing season, but occasional adjustments may be necessary to equalize the weights of animals providing manure to the different ponds.
In the case of smaller experimental units, such as tanks or pools, it probably will be necessary to take direct weight of each lot of added manure. In this case it will be necessary to standardize the procedures so that the material weighed has a consistent and uniform degree of freshness and moisture content. This, of course, would apply to both green and animal manures.
5.4 Studies of green manure
In the Chinese system of integrated fish farming, green fodder is added primarily to feed the herbivorous fishes, and secondarily to provide manure in the form of faeces from grass carp and/or other herbivorous fishes. Green fodder may also have a significant value as a manure when not eaten by grass carp, or other herbivores. It therefore follows that green fodder should be evaluated: (1) as a combination of feed and manure; and (2) purely as a manure. Such information could have special value in other areas that might have an abundance of green fodder, but little or no animal manure for use in fish ponds. It would also improve our understanding of the relative benefits derived from green and animal manure in Chinese fish ponds. However, in order to make such separate evaluations it would appear necessary to conduct experiments both with and without grass carp. Green manure should therefore be evaluated in terms of: (1) its value as purely a manure when compared to animal
manure; (2) its use as direct food; and (3) its manurial value for the production of natural foods (bacteria, plankton, benthos, etc.).
(i) Green fodder as a manure
These studies would compare the benefits of green manure and animal manure in terms of fish yield, water quality, and rates of production of natural food. The experiments will be carried out with standard polycultures of silver carp, bighead carp, common carp and tilapia, but without grass carp. These studies should also compare the relative values of: (1) different types of commonly used green fodders (coarse grasses, fine grasses, vegetable tops, etc.); and (2) their relative values when given as fresh fodder, or when applied after composting.
(ii) Green fodder as food and manure
These experiments would duplicate those outlined in the previous section (same input of green on composted fodder, same densities of fishes) except that the polyculture would contain sufficient grass carp to utilize a significant portion of the fodder as direct food.
5.5 Pond Dynamics
The path from manure input to fish growth is sufficiently complex that it warrants study in the more simplified environment of a tank prior to investigations in ponds. It appears that what must be identified are the rates at which components of the manure are either directly harvested by the fish or converted into substances that form food of fish and then the rates at which these substances are harvested and utilized for fish growth.
Analyses of cow and chicken manure reveal low available energy (500 to 1 200 cal/gram), low true protein (1-10%), high ash (about 20%), and high fibre (about 50%) as compared to some fish feeds (3 000 cal/gram; less than 10% ash). This implies that while fish may graze on manure as it is supplied to the pond, some cycling of the crude manure components occurs to change them into a more useful food.
Naturally or artificially labelled (e.g., using carbon-14) straw or cotton fibre plus appropriate chemicals (also labelled) and polysaccharides will be used to make a simulated manure. This manure will be used as the input for a tank study. To simplify the initial tests, the tank will not have a bottom silt layer and will not be stocked with fish. Rates of fibre disappearance (digestion) and chemical uptakes (by autotrophs and by heterotrophs) will be monitored. Concurrently, rates of autotrophic production (by chlorophyll-A; primary production; algae accumulation on walls and bottom) and heterotrophic production (epifluorescence) on detritus and on tank wall slime; accumulation of mucopolysaccharides on solid surfaces will be estimated (exact rates will not be possible to determine due to the complexity of the system). In addition, total BOD of the tank will be monitored by covering the tank, stopping aeration if in operation, and measuring the rate of decrease in tank DO.
This provides an indication of total respiration of all organisms in the tank. Respiration is a qualitative indicator of metabolic processes.
Incorporation of the substances derived from the fibre and chemicals of the manure into algae and other microbial cells will be monitored by following the labels through the food web. As understanding of the paths is gained, tests in fish-stocked tanks will be conducted. The incorporation of the labels into the fish bodies should permit evaluation of paths and rates leading from manure to fish and hence a more efficient use of pond and manure.
The use of aerators would undoubtedly affect the ability of ponds to utilize manures and other wastes. Selected types of aerators should be used and their effects on pond dynamics monitored.
5.6 Straw and other high-fibre substrates
Digestibility of substrates with a large percentage of fibre is low, but proper treatment can increase this digestibility. This treatment often incorporates crushing the fibre and some hydrolysis. Reported results indicate that chopping or crushing prior to hydrolysis is preferable.
Using a ball mill or equivalent, the straw should be crushed and broken to pieces 0.25-1 cm long. The fragments may then be moistened with 1 percent NaOH for one or more days at ambient temperature and at 25°C for a standard control. The action of the NaOH is to swell the fibre and partly separate the lignin from the cellulose.
Digestibility of treated and non-treated straw can be measured by using pepsin or trypsin enzymes (although fish may have trypsin enzyme, pepsin has been reported to give similar results) to solubilize that part of the straw which is digestible. A standard temperature, e.g., 25 or 30°C, can be selected, and with proper pH adjustment, the enzyme added to the treated and non-treated straw or other fibre in an Ehrlenmeyer flask and shaken (on a shaker table or by hand a few times a day) for a selected length of time (one to several days). Dry weight loss of the solids from before to after digestion is an indication of digestibility. It will be useful to measure lignin, cellulose, and total fibre in the original straw and in the treated straw, before and after digestion.
Fish growth rates on these high-fibre substrates can be measured in tanks. Since about half the dry weight of the fibre is carbon, and the original fibre contains low amounts of N and P, the C:N:P of the substrate should be adjusted to 20:1:0.2 by measuring the dry weight of the fibre and calculating the required N and P fertilizers to be added.
As in the studies of pond dynamics, these high-fibre studies may first be done in tanks with neither fish nor bottom silt. This facilitates measurement of rates of conversion of these fibres to microbial and algal growth. As these paths are better understood, the silt and fish may be introduced in successive tests.
5.7 Fish stock and stocking rates
The Chinese experience has led to the use of polycultures containing as many as 8 or 9 compatible species having different food habits. It is possible that equally high rates of production can be achieved using a fewer number of appropriate species, or by monoculture; and that the disadvantages of producing a fewer number of species might be compensated by the savings in money and labour in producing, stocking, managing, harvesting and distributing a greater number of species, at least in certain areas.
It is recommended that experiments be conducted to compare the efficiencies of:
(1) monoculture of tilapia; (2) polyculture limited to 4 or 5 species; and (3) polycultures containing 8 or 9 species, as practised in China. Certain tilapias are known to be relatively omnivorous, and to feed on the bottom as well as all levels of the water column. In a polyculture of few species, all available feeding niches would appear to be filled by a combination of silver, bighead, grass and common carps, though tilapia might be added.
It is also recommended that such a limited polyculture be utilized in conducting experiments earlier recommended for comparing different manures, and different depths and areas of ponds. The ratio of species in such experimental populations should be rigidly standardized. For example, it might contain 5 silver carps to 1 bighead carp to 2 grass carps to 1 common carp, at a standard total density of 1 000 fish/mu.
5.8 Silt and pond bottom studies
To better understand the impact which silt has upon the pond ecosystem, a series of studies in the laboratory, in tanks, and in ponds will be made dealing with silt and pond water.
Laboratory analyses will consist of measuring: concentration of chemicals thought to be important in the pond ecosystem (N, NH[3], P, K, Ca, Mg, CO[3], Na, Cl, H[2]S); organic matter content of silt (as total volatile matter combusted at 550°C); redox potential across the water-silt interface; pH in water and in silt. To facilitate analysis, cores of silt will be taken in two or three specific locations in tanks or ponds from which the silt has been removed. Overlying water will be taken with the silt core to minimize disturbance of the interface. Sampling will start upon filling with water and will continue weekly throughout the growing season. In addition, rates of weight loss of standard fibre (cotton cloth woven of threads, having a weight of about 30 mg/metre is adequate) at the silt interface and in the water column will be measured continuously, with five days immersion time of the fibre in the tank or pond. These data will be analysed against weekly or fortnightly
measurements of fish growth, with a view to determining whether there is a correlation between chemical or organic changes in the silt and fish growth.
There is the possibility that accumulation of extracellular production of mucopolysaccharides or of other metabolites may affect fish growth. If the more simple chemical and organic analyses outlined above do not show a correlation with measured trends in fish growth, or do not explain these trends, then chromatography of the water column and of interstitial water of the silt may be useful in revealing changes in concentrations of these organic molecules which may have an impact on fish growth.
Cycling of such key elements as N and P across the silt-water interface certainly is important to sustaining algal and microbial growth. Such cycling might best be initially studied in tanks with silt bottoms. Tank studies would permit use of radioactive labels. Transfer of P introduced into the water column or into the silt could be followed as it moves through the water-soil-biological system.
To Understand the relative effectiveness of silt as a crop fertilizer, the chemical and organic content of the silt will be correlated with crop growth using silt as a fertilizer. Comparative studies will be made of crop growth with the application of standard chemical fertilizers
5.9 Experimental studies and economic evaluations
Most of the studies described earlier involve experimental work in laboratories, outdoor tanks/pools, experimental plots, or experimental or commune farms. While some investigations would need only one type of facility, others may need more than one or all. Based on the nature of work involved they can be classified into some five groups.
The following are studies that should preferably be carried out in both the experimental ponds at the Centre, and in commune ponds.
(i) Evaluations of various types of manures or manure treatments in terms of both fish production and water quality.
(ii) Fish diseases and mortalities as function of manuring.
(iii) Fish as carriers of pathogens.
(iv) Effects of supplementary feeding.
(v) Effects of aeration.
(vi) Fish stocking strategies (use of monocultures, limited polycultures and multi-species polycultures; use of different densities and combinations of species).
The studies that can be carried out in the experimental ponds at the Regional Lead Centre are:
(i) Silt production as a function of manuring.
(ii) Evaluations of formulated feeds
(iii) Evaluations of those treatments given preliminary screening in the laboratory or in small pools (use of treated and untreated straw as substrates; testing of 'standardized' manure; evaluations of various manures, or treatments of manures, etc.).
(iv) Studies of biological and chemical processes on the pond bottom.
(v) Pond dynamics.
The following studies will have to be carried out in commune ponds.
(i) Study of the effects of pond depth and area, with special reference to influence on dissolved oxygen, other water quality parameters, and overall economics of pond operation.
(ii) Evaluations of methods of manure management and application.
(iii) Economics of the use of land and other resources in integrated farms.
The investigations listed below can be carried out in the laboratory of the Centre:
(i) Determination of chemical and organic constituents of manures (green and animal).
(ii) Study of treated and untreated straw (rates of digestion, colonization by bacteria, utilization by fishes, etc.).
(iii) Development of a 'standardized' manure formulated on the basis of desired levels of mineral and organic input.
(iv) Analyses of available by-products for formulation of a supplemental feed, and formulation and testing of same.
(v) Analyses and evaluations of silt constituents.
Some of the laboratory studies have to be followed up by yard or pool experiments, which include:
(i) Comparative evaluations of various manures - green, animal, fresh, composted and fermented (rates of decomposition, mineralization, and uptake by experimental fishes, and rates of fish growth).
(ii) Evaluations of formulated feeds.
(iii) Use of treated and untreated straw as substrates.
(iv) Dynamics of silt-water interface.
In all investigations, particularly the experiments in the Centre and commune ponds, determination of costs (both direct and indirect) should form an integral element. This will enable evaluations and comparisons of the economic efficiencies of different procedures and systems of integration. Such data will be required for the construction of economic models of selected types of integrations that could be recommended for different countries or regions.
