<title>ADCP/REP/78/4 - AID for Aquaculture Development. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Aid for Aquaculture </title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Most countries of the world, particularly developing countries, are interested in the development of aquaculture for increasing fishery production. Based on the rates of increased production achieved in countries that have given the essential support to aqua-culture industries it has been projected that a five-fold increase in overall world production, which amounts to about 30 million tons, is achievable by the end of the century. Such increased production is expected to be achieved through:
(a) wider application of known technologies, including the expansion of areas under culture,
(b) improvement of existing technologies to enable more intensive farming, and, to a lesser extent,
(c) the development and utilization of new technologies.
It is, however, recognized that such an increase is contingent on a variety of factors, the most important of which are financial investment, technical expertise, production inputs and support services. Developing countries would need substantial external aid for the implementation of their development plans. No single aid agency can provide all the aid needed and it is obvious that some form of cooperation between aid agencies and coordination of assistance programmes could prove very valuable. The FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture held in Kyoto, May-June 1976, considered this matter and suggested that "some suitable means of frequent consultations between bilateral and multilateral donor agencies should be established so as to enable the best use of funds and facilities available". Partly in implementation of this recommendation and largely in pursuance of the objective of developing close working relations with donor agencies, the FAO/UNDP ad hoc Consultation on Aid
for Aquaculture Development was jointly organized by FAO and UNDP through the Aqua-culture Development and Coordination Programme in La Toja (Pontevedra), Spain, 20-23 June 1978.
The meeting was inaugurated by Mr. Herman Watzinger, Assistant Director-General (Fisheries) of FAO who described the increasing importance of aquaculture in world fisheries and consequently in the programme of work of FAO. He pointed out the need to mobilize support from all available sources to facilitate accelerated development of the industry. Mr. William A. Ripley, Fisheries Advisor, UNDP, welcomed the participants on behalf of UNDP and briefly traced UNDP's role so far in the development of this sector of fisheries, particularly the launching of the inter-regional Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and the series of regional and national projects under its umbrella.
Dr. Clarence P. Idyll, Chief of the Division of International Fisheries Development and Services, National Marine Fisheries Services, NOAA, Washington (U.S.A.) served as the Chairman of the meeting and Dr. T.V.R. Pillay (FAO) as Secretary.
The agenda followed and the list of participants are given in Annexes I and II respectively. Commander Miguel A. Bringuis Villanueva, Naval Chief, Villagarcia Bay, addressed the closing session of the meeting on behalf of the Director-General of Fisheries of Spain. The field visits on 22 June 1978 were organized through the courtesy of Centro Experimental del Plan de Explotación Marisquera de Galicia, with the assistance of Prof. F. López Capont, University of Santiago de Compostela.
<section>2</section>
2. AID FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
In discussions on overall aid requirements for aquaculture the meeting took into account some of the special characteristics of aquaculture that are significant in connexion with the procurement of aid.
Aquaculture can be organized as either small- or large-scale enterprises, adopting the level of intensification desired by the operators. It conforms very closely with the priority areas of concentration of many aid-giving agencies, as is evident from the following. Aquaculture is accepted as a major means of increasing food production, especially of animal proteins in developing countries, including the Least Developed Countries (LDC's) and the Most Seriously Affected Countries (MSA's). It can contribute substantially to the improvement of the economy and living conditions of the rural poor, generate more employment in rural areas so as to reduce unemployment and under-employment in developing countries. Through increased food production it contributes to the achievement of self-sufficiency in fishery production and in many cases save or earn much-needed foreign exchange. Aquaculture is an important means of protecting aquatic areas from pollution and other environmental
degradation through compatible management measures adopted in farming. In spite of such close conformity of objectives, the quantum of aid given to aquaculture by donor agencies continues to be small.
The meeting discussed some of the reasons for the limited flow of aid to aquaculture. Being a labour-intensive type of industry, aquaculture in developing countries utilizes only very limited equipment and even major inputs like feed will normally be produced locally using local ingredients to make the operation economically feasible. So aid in the form of equipment has only limited relevance in aquaculture. Expertise in this field, particularly in tropical aquaculture, is scarce in donor countries and this also acts as a deterrent to greater involvement of donors. But probably the most important factor appeared to be the unfamiliarity of the field and lack of information on the profitability and success of aquaculture enterprises. On the other hand failures of some of the ill-conceived projects have received wide publicity, creating the image of an unprofitable industry, not contributing very much to fishery production. During discussions on this point, it was suggested
that early action should be taken to compile information on successful aquaculture programmes and to present it in a manner that will be understood and appreciated by donors and financiers. A reliable data base, particularly of relative economics, has to be developed to facilitate decision-making by aid-giving agencies. It was pointed out in this connexion that demands are often made, as a pre-requisite for aid, that aquaculture should fulfil criteria that other, even long-established and well-supported food production enterprises, are unable to meet. Some of the reluctance to risk aid may be traced to the lack of adequate legislative support for aquaculture enterprises. The need for governmental recognition of the importance of aquaculture in national development and the accordance of appropriately high priority in national development policies has been well demonstrated by countries where such recognition has led to very significant advances.
<section>3</section>
3. INVESTMENT NEEDS
Rough assessments of the investment requirements made on the basis of the projected increases in production in 32 developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America were considered by the meeting. The initial investment for increased production per ton (covering capital construction, including water supply and auxiliary facilities but excluding the cost of land) was roughly estimated at about U.S. $ 1 000 on a global average. This is probably somewhat higher than what is required for equivalent production by fishing, but the economic life of fishing equipment is short and the depreciation therefore high. On the contrary, the economic life of other aquaculture facilities is very much longer and in the case of fish farms, if well maintained, almost unlimited. If the investment cost for production of inputs and for the processing and marketing of produce is added, the total average investment would work out to about U.S. $ 1 235 for a ton of increased production. Based on
this the total capital investment requirement of the above mentioned 32 countries works out to about U.S. $ 6 304 million by the year 1985. The operating costs for an initial period may average about U.S. $ 450 per ton. As both the capital and operating costs vary very considerably between countries and even between localities within a country, these figures are to be considered as only indicative and providing a basis for evaluating the magnitude of financial investments involved.
As the foreign exchange component of investments involved is small, some countries may find it possible to raise a good proportion of the required resources internally. However, clear proof of financial profitability will have to be provided if such investments have to be obtained from commercial banks or similar financing agencies. Programmes like rural aquaculture organized for integrated development of rural areas cannot be evaluated purely on the basis of financial benefits as often the social and nutritional benefits derived by a community may even outweigh the financial returns. The meeting noted that the World Bank and regional banks like the Inter-American Development Bank give adequate weightage to social and other benefits in appraisals of projects for financial assistance. This does not, however, minimize the need to demonstrate the financial benefits of aquaculture. In fact there is sufficient evidence available, even though not fully documented, to show the
financial efficiency of aquaculture and the superiority of it in this respect in combined operations such as multiple use of water bodies, crop-cum-fish production, etc.
<section>4</section>
4. TRAINING OF MANPOWER
The scarcity of well trained and experienced practical aquaculturists is probably the most important constraint to rapid expansion of aquaculture worldwide. While different categories of personnel are needed for a well-rounded development programme, institutionalized training is needed for three categories of core personnel, viz., senior aquaculturists, technicians and extension workers. The number of senior aquaculturists needed in most countries at any particular time is too small to warrant national training arrangements. It would, therefore, be necessary to organize multidisciplinary training of such personnel on a regional or sub-regional basis in suitable institutions with adequate facilities and qualified training staff. Technicians and extension workers have to be trained in their own countries or, when necessary, on a group-country basis in the local language, with adequate emphasis on the culture systems and techniques that are likely to be utilized in their future
work.
The establishment of regional training centres for senior aquaculturists and national centres for training of technicians and extension personnel would therefore be of high priority. Due to the multidisciplinary nature of the training to be imparted and the need for adequate facilities for practical work in the field, hatcheries and laboratories, the establishment of such training centres will obviously be somewhat expensive. Because of this it may be necessary, at least initially, to combine training with research, even though this may not be the ideal arrangement.
<section>5</section>
5. RESEARCH
Effective aquaculture research has to be oriented toward developing feasible husbandry practices. As the projected increases in aquaculture production in the developing world are expected to be obtained by the application of known technologies, adaptive research to enable the transfer of technologies or the improvement of the techniques involved will have highest priority in the context of a strategy for worldwide development of the industry. The nature of facilities and variety of disciplinal expertise required make it extremely difficult, at least for the present, to organize the required type of research on a national basis. On the other hand, centralizing such research in one international centre would be counter-productive because of the differences in species cultured and the need to study the various aspects in the set of environmental conditions in which the particular species occurs and those in which it has to be reared. However, geographic regions which have, or
plan to adopt, the same culture systems and have very similar climatic and socio-economic conditions, can be identified. Problems facing the application of selected systems in those regions can be investigated more economically and efficiently in regional institutions. The results of such work will have to be tested in national centres and any major problems encountered referred back to the regional institutions for further studies and solutions. The national centres need to be strengthened for this purpose and for undertaking research on problems of a purely local nature. Close linkages will have to be established between the regional and national centres so as to form effective networks of research centres. These centres could also organize the multidisciplinary training of core personnel for aquaculture development as indicated earlier. If existing research stations are to be expanded to serve as regional research and training centres the estimated capital costs would be
between U.S. $ 5 and 10 million. The annual operating costs may be about U.S.$ 1 million for one region.
<section>6</section>
6. INFORMATION
A free exchange of information is of primary importance in the development of aquaculture, particularly since the major increases in production in the near future are to be achieved through transfer of technology. A unified comprehensive information gathering, processing and dissemination system would be necessary to meet the needs of aquaculture development. The existing information systems of some relevance to aquaculture attempt bibliographic coverage of aquaculture publications. What is of greater significance to aquaculture development would be the unconventional types of information and data contained in unpublished documents and restricted reports. Collection of these have necessarily to be done on a decentralized basis. The regional networks of research and training centres discussed earlier could be well utilized with advantage for this purpose. All input centres must use the same indexing vocabularies with a high degree of consistency if the system is to function
properly. It is necessary to process inputs from various sources at a central point for feedback of the total processed information to the input stations for dissemination in appropriate forms. If existing systems such as the National Aquaculture Information System (NAIS) sponsored by the Sea Grant Program of U.S.A. or the Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS) jointly sponsored by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of Unesco and the FAO Fisheries Department, were to be utilized, the cost of the whole operation could be minimized. The central processing station could also serve as an information retrieval centre for areas not covered by regional networks, thus serving global needs in this regard. It was suggested that such a system could be operated at an annual cost of only about U.S. $ 70 000 if existing facilities could be utilized. During discussions it was, however, pointed out that the
cost may be higher if additional staff expenditure is involved in data gatherings.
<section>7</section>
7. REVIEW OF CURRENT AND PROPOSED AID PROGRAMMES
7.1 International Foundation for Science (IFS)
7.2 United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
7.3 Sea Grant Programme, U.S.A.
7.4 German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
7.5 International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
7.6 International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources (ICLARM)
7.7 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
7.8 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
7.1 International Foundation for Science (IFS)
The International Foundation for Science (IFS), founded in 1972, is a non-governmental organization based on scientific academies and research councils in 42 countries, of which two-thirds are in developing countries. Its objects are to promote and support research in natural and social sciences and in technology for the benefit of developing countries. The Foundation provides young scientists and technologists of outstanding merit with financial and other support for their work. The main criteria for a grant are the scientific quality and promise of the proposed research and its relevance to the country concerned. In addition, IFS sponsors seminars and workshops of a regional or international character. The first regional meeting on aquaculture is to be held 28 September - 1 October 1978 in Malaysia in cooperation with the School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia.
Fifty-three grants for aquaculture were approved by IFS in 1974-77 (see list in Annex III). This is 21 percent of all IFS grants in the period, and aquaculture ranks in number of projects as the third of the six IFS priority areas. Some of the projects supported are at a stage where extensions into pilot production projects can be foreseen.
Table I
Africa
Asia
Latin America
Total
Universities
National Research Institutes
Total
Table I shows that three-quarters of the projects are carried out at universities, and in Asia the ratio is as high as four-fifths. But good extension services are vital for the practical application of aquaculture research, particularly in small-scale rural programmes, and here national research institutes often have an advantage over universities. While maintaining its interest in support to university research, IFS would encourage more applications from national research institutes (or from agricultural universities).
The following table shows the classification of projects based on subject and ecological coverage.
Table II
Freshwater
Brackish and Marine Waters
Others
Fish
Shellfish
Algae
Others
Total
The most important species studied are mullet (9 projects), tilapia (8 projects), catfish (5 projects) and carp (4 projects). In addition, there is one project of groupers in floating cages, one on ectoparasites on milkfish, one on the agricultural by-products for trout breeding and nine on local fish fauna.
Mullet (9 projects)
The species of mullet studied by IFS grantees are mainly Mugil spp. and particularly Mugil cephalus. Three grants have been awarded to Indian scientists to carry out bio-systematic analysis of grey mullet and to investigate the influence of temperature, salinity and dissolved oxygen on the survival, energy utilization and growth of the mullet species, Rhinomugil corsula. One grantee in Sri Lanka is investigating the possible polyculture of the grey mullet (M. cephalus) with prawns. In Turkey, a project was started in 1975 on the rearing of grey mullet fry, including work in artificial and natural feeding and induced spawning. This last project was terminated after one year because the grantee left the country. In Egypt, where mullet is already extensively cultured in fish farms, a grant has been given to a research project on induced spawning in order to satisfy the great need for fry. A project was initiated in Sierra Leone on the feeding biology and feed requirements of
the grey mullet in relation to productivity. The intention is to continue this project with aquaculture experiments of grey mullet in ponds of both fresh and brackish water. Finally, two grants have been recently approved for two projects in Colombia and Cuba, respectively, to study fish farming of mullet, including induced spawning experiments.
Tilapia (8 projects)
Five of the eight projects on tilapia relate to controlling their reproduction in ponds by various methods, including hybridization, and use of predators for reducing fry populations.
In addition, there is one project on artificial feeding and consequent growth rate and one on the testing of different types of fertilizers and different fish feeds to determine the most productive and economic combinations.
Catfish (5 projects)
Two projects are concerned with Chrysichthys spp., which are limited to West Africa and have not before been used for aquaculture. One of the main obstacles has been to obtain fry through artificial spawning. Growth and reproduction patterns of these species under different feeding conditions are also currently being investigated.
Three projects are concerned with the following catfish species: Pimelodus clarias (nicuro). Clarias macrocephalus, and air-breathing catfish, Clarias and Anabas spp. Research areas covered by these three projects are controlled breeding and nutritional studies, including the use of inexpensive diets from locally produced feed.
Carp (4 projects)
Three projects are concerned with improvement of cultivation of the common carp in monoculture or in combination with tilapia, through artificial feeding and artificial fry production in Madagascar and in Egypt. The fourth project concerns artificial feeding of three different species of carp, i.e. Catla catla, Labeo rohita and Cirrhina mrigala and fertilization trials in fish ponds.
IFS supports one project on the rearing of Epinephelus tauvina in floating cages in Penang.
Milkfish (1 project)
IFS supports a project on the investigation of milkfish ectoparasites in Indonesia. Another project aims at studying the utilization of waste products of sericulture as feed for local fish farms which cultivate milkfish.
Trout (1 project)
One grant has been awarded to study the utilization of agricultural by-products for trout breeding in Peru.
Local Fish Species (9 projects)
IFS supports nine projects on investigations on the culture of local fish, including the following species: Alestes sp., Osphronemus sp., Prochilodus reticulatus, Petenia umbrifera, Tor tambroides, Polunemus inducus, Eleutheronema tetradactylum, Brycon sp., Colossoma nigricans and Oxyeleotris marmorata.
Crustaceans: Shimps and Prawns (6 projects)
Four projects are carried out in Southeast Asia (three in Thailand and one in Malaysia), one in India and one in Sri Lanka.
The main lines of research developed in the five projects on Macrobrachium are:
- Artificial incubation of Macrobrachium eggs;
- Techniques for rearing of larvae up to seedling stage;
- Feeding experiments using locally available feeds;
- The occurrence of osmotic and ionic stress in the prawns during their migration from marine or brackish water into fresh water;
- Tolerance of the prawn to various pollutants by bioassay methods;
- Investigation of the possibilities of Macrobrachium culture in reservoirs.
In addition there is one project aimed at verifying the effect of tea seed used to control predator fish in shrimp ponds.
Mussels (1 project)
Only one project has been initiated in this field (in Malaysia). The work has mainly been focussed on the possible mass farming of the mussel, Mytilus viridis Linnaeus. The spawning season, physiological factors, various culture methods, feeding pattern, induced spawning for laboratory programmed production of seedlings and other related matters, are investigated.
Successful induced spawning of M. viridis was achieved in a seawater medium containing 0.2 percent NH[4]OH.
Algae (3 projects)
One of the projects supported by IFS aims at studying growth, reproduction, nutrition and ecology of local algae of economic importance as potential sources of food for cattle, poultry and even human beings.
The two remaining projects investigate algae as a potential source of raw material for industry. In Tanzania, studies have been initiated to estimate the content of colloid substance in selected Tanzanian seaweed. The results could serve as a basis for possible seaweed farming in Tanzanian coastal villages. A small pilot plant for local production of gum could also be established in the implementation phase of this project. Another project concerns a study of the ecological factors limiting the growth, biomass production and gel production of Chilean gelidiales (Rhodophyta). The experimental results in the laboratory will be used to start mass cultivation of algae under controlled conditions.
7.2 United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) established in 1976 a Fisheries Division to assist with development of small-scale fisheries, fish processing and other fishery problems as well as with aquaculture. This step reflects a renewed interest in fisheries and aquaculture by that agency. Four people currently are assigned to the Fisheries Division, two fisheries advisors, an aquaculture advisor and an economist. The Fisheries Division serves two broad functions:
(1) managing research and development projects with broad potential application, and
(2) serving in a technical advisory role to the regional bureaus and overseas missions of AID to assist with individual country development projects.
AID'S goals and objectives are oriented toward specific impacts on increasing food production and employment, income, and nutrition of the rural poor in developing countries. For this reason most aquaculture activities are limited to small-scale practices with low-priced species and with species for local consumption rather than for export. Emphasis is placed on relatively simple, small-scale production units which can be operated by small land holders with limited resources. AID does not participate in large-scale commercial activities, such as shrimp farming or deep sea fishing because investment money for these activities is available from the business community. While these activities are recognized as being important, AID'S mandate is to assist countries with programmes that impact on poor and disadvantaged people in the LDC's.
Three centrally-funded activities are presently managed by the Fisheries Division. Support for the International Center for Aquaculture at Auburn University has been provided by AID for a period of 7 years to assist in the development of research, training and extension capabilities of the University in the field of aquaculture. This support has enabled Auburn to play an active role in a variety of development projects in the LDC's. The level of support during 1977 was about U.S. $ 350 000 per year. Auburn University has a strong graduate-level educational programme, offers a five-month practical training course in aquaculture each year, and presently has about 30 foreign students involved in on-campus research, as well as both practical and academic training. All aspects of the Auburn programme are intended to be transferred to field projects where Auburn staff serve in a wide range of roles including technology transfer, development of extension and educational programmes
and research implementation.
A research project on the artificial propagation of milkfish at the Oceanic Institute in Hawaii is supported by AID. This research is directed toward improving methods of handling, maturing, and spawning milkfish adults in captivity. This research, which is funded at a rate of about U.S. $ 370 000 per year is scheduled to continue for one additional year. Additional work is needed on milkfish reproduction and larval rearing in spite of recent advances, and support to some ongoing activity in this field is planned.
Through a small centrally-funded contract AID has assisted Brazil with the development of research and training capabilities at the aquaculture centre in Pentecoste, Brazil. The annual budget for this activity is about U.S. $ 60 000 per year, and the project will end in early 1979.
A number of AID-supported aquaculture projects are being carried out under contracts managed directly by the USAID Missions in developing countries. A list of presently active projects follows:
Honduras - Small-scale aquaculture demonstration project - U.S. $ 80 000 per year.
Indonesia - Brackish water aquaculture - U.S. $ 220 000 per year.
Jamaica - Fisheries programme development - U.S. $ 170 000 per year.
Peru - Trout production - U.S. $ 150 000 per year.
Philippines - Aquaculture research and extension - U.S. $ 130 000 per year.
Colombia - Aquaculture facilities, training and extension - U.S. $ 2 200 000 loan over several year period.
Cameroon, Central African Empire and Zaire - Cooperative assistance with U.S. Peace Corps projects - low-level funding assistance.
In addition AID is interested in the activities of the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), and is considering financial support to this institution. A number of country projects are being planned in the field of aquaculture, and a new programme is being developed to support collaborative research involving U.S. and foreign institutions and related to either small-scale fisheries or fish farming.
7.3 Sea Grant Programme, U.S.A.
The Sea Grant Programme of the National Oceanographic Administration in the U.S.A. has given special emphasis to aquaculture research and development. A new Sea Grant programme will begin this year, which will provide support for programmes to enhance the research and development capability of foreign nations in aquatic sciences (including aquaculture).
Proposals for such support are accepted from United States universities (or other research groups). A U.S. university applying should have created an association with a university or other partner (a fishery agency, or a research laboratory) in the foreign country.
The amount of funds available for this new programme is U.S. $ 900 000 for fiscal year 1979 (FY 79) beginning 1 October 1978. At least this same amount will probably be available in FY 80; for subsequent years funding has not yet been arranged.
Foreign research groups which have or can establish partnership arrangements with an American university can suggest research and development projects in aquaculture (or other aquatic science subjects) to the U.S. institution. If that institution agrees to do so, it can apply to the Office of Sea Grant for funding.
The FY 79 funds have been committed, in response to a considerable number of applications. And since many of the projects are of a nature that they cannot be completed in one year, a substantial part of the FY 80 money has in effect also been committed. However, there may be some funds available for new projects in FY 80, and if the programme continues past that year applications will be accepted from United States/foreign partnerships. Proposals most likely to be funded are those that have a strong component in training and education. Some of the proposals likely to be funded this year include aquaculture components,
7.4 German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
The technical assistance to developing countries provided by the Government of Germany through the Ministry for Economic Cooperation is implemented by the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), which is a privately organized company operating under civil law. Its task is to spread know-how in the fields of "food production techniques, education, economics and organized aspects" at the request of governments of developing countries, preference being given to sectors for which high priority is accorded by the governments. About two-thirds of the projects are implemented directly by GTZ staff and the rest by consultants. Formerly the Animal Production Department dealt with fisheries, but a separate Fisheries Department was created in 1975. The Department is at present responsible for the operation of twelve on-going projects and six more are in the pipeline.
Aquaculture is a relatively new activity as far as GTZ is concerned. Interest is at present mainly concentrated on the transfer of well-known technologies, mainly semi-intensive culture of trout and carp with emphasis on hatcheries. Due to the lack of expertise it has not been possible to implement any aquaculture projects so far but two projects, one in Egypt and another in Turkey, are now in the pipeline and are expected to be implemented shortly. The German Ministry for Economic Cooperation would welcome properly prepared project proposals in the field of aquaculture for technical support and implementation.
7.5 International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
The observer from IDRC briefly outlined its aquaculture programme which involved 10 projects in six countries of Asia, seven projects in five countries of Africa, and two projects in two countries of Latin America. There were three additional supporting projects in Canada and more than 12 projects in the pipeline. The programme provided assistance to self-managed projects involving equipment training, operational costs and, where necessary, expatriate personnel. Though financed by the Canadian treasury, the Centre's staffing, or provision of equipment, training or services, were obtained wherever the recipient country had to be endorsed by the economic planning ministries of the countries concerned, indicating its priority significance for food or rural employment. Most projects are applicable beyond the borders of the country and exchange their findings at regional workshops held by the project.
Apart from training of national researchers on-the-job, in effective aquaculture experimentation, the projects have so far succeeded in the breeding of Chinese carps in Malaysia in every month of the year; the breeding and larval rearing of milkfish in SEAFDEC in the Philippines; the demonstration of the effective field application of the research results obtained by CIFRI, India; the production of pituitary extracts from 260 000 spawning Pacific salmon for breeding of tropical indigenous species, and the rearing of tropical oysters to market size in Sierra Leone and Sabah. Linkages have been established with many institutions outside the project countries in regional workshops to discuss results. Many project researchers take formal courses overseas and do their practical thesis research on the project at home. While projects are increasing in number it is intended to limit the funding at no more than U.S. $ 3 million per year though host countries contributions generally
far exceed the "seed" money of IDRC.
The projects are largely concentrated in South and South East Asia as they arose from the formulating and planning workshop held in 1973 in Malaysia when the major constraints and target species were identified and the convenient or logical countries of the project operations were agreed upon. Subsequently, in association with the aquaculture subcommittee of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, a regional network for aquaculture research was suggested. IDRC has endeavoured to follow this up. Subsequently, in response to a request from the South East Asia Fishery Development Centre and the approval of the TAC, a mission has just concluded, in April 1978, a comprehensive study of countries of south and southeast Asian countries and has now provided a report of a recommended network for the underpinning research programme required for aquaculture in Asia and the Pacific. This report is available from TAC.
7.6 International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources (ICLARM)
In the absence of a representative of ICLARM, the representative of USAID presented a brief report on the Centre's activities and future plans. ICLARM, an autonomous, non-profit, international scientific and technical centre, has been organized to conduct and accelerate research on all aspects of fisheries and other living aquatic resources. Although its interests are world-wide, initially the organization's primary attention is being directed to problems in South East Asia and the South West Pacific.
ICLARM's basic strategy is to take initiatives in research, identifying and attacking critical problems in aquaculture, traditional fisheries, resource development and management, marine affairs, and education and training, in order to lay a sound foundation for production and management programmes. A fundamental programme feature is that primary attention is given to the interplay among various disciplines of fisheries. That is, all areas of fisheries are considered and not just one, such as aquaculture of traditional fisheries. This is considered critical, since developments in one area often have considerable impact on other areas. In addition, events completely outside fisheries (e.g., increased energy costs) may have completely different effects in different fishery areas.
The organization has no physical research infrastructure and instead undertakes cooperative programmes with existing institutions when research facilities are required.
The most critical problem in aquaculture is considered to be the lack of a consistent and adequate supply of fry or "seed". So one of ICLARM's major program thrusts will be in the area of controlled breeding and mass production of fry and related nutritional problems. To this end, in the past year ICLARM has begun the establishment of an international network of institutions which are currently engaged in aquacultural research and can be linked together by collaborative projects. Initially centres are planned in the Philippines, Thailand and Egypt.
Recognizing the importance of information dissemination, ICLARM has developed a publications programme which will provide a selective flow of information into and out of the southeast Asian region and which will carry out projects for collating and translating information, especially in local languages. In addition to a quarterly newsletter, ICLARM will publish a Report Series carrying scientific and technical papers as well as an Information Series covering interpretive articles and non-technical information.
7.7 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
In 1969, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) undertook an analysis of the possibilities and significance of fishery development in Latin America formulating guidelines for a promotional action and outlining strategies and means for its implementation.
The initial strategy guidelines favours integrated projects involving port infrastructure, fishing fleet, plants and marketing systems; training and research programmes may also be included. The purpose of this approach was to avoid the development of subsectorial bottlenecks.
The second approach was to create, on the basis of these projects, new development oriented institutions, since the fishery administration in most countries has been limited to small scientific and statistical units.
The third element of the strategy was to provide preferential support to projects with the greatest socio-economic impact, despite the difficulties they involve for rapid execution and the less attractiveness they represent to the private sector. That is the case of coastal fisheries for the supply of domestic or regional markets. Finally, the fourth guideline was to design institutional structures for project implementation that could be used for expanding the project goals merely by adding new investment units to the basic scheme.
Depending on the fishing industry status of each country, projects could be initiated either through cooperatives or through private corporations, whereas in other cases they would have to be set up through state corporations until the sector becomes stable enough for private investments.
Intermediate technologies were carefully selected so as to make the best use of the local resources tending to yield a low-cost final product that would make food stuffs accessible to the majority of consumers.
The sixteen fishery projects prepared with IDB assistance during the last 7 years represent a total investment of U.S. $ 560 million and may require international financing to the tune of U.S. $ 320 million. Projected production is 671 000 tons per year (1.0 percent of world production), which would represent a 10 percent increase over the current regional catches and an increase of over 31 percent in the supply of fish for human consumption. The average productivity of the 21 000 fishermen who will benefit from these projects is estimated at 32 tons per caput, i.e., 10 times more than the present average productivity of the region.
A rational target for the contribution of fisheries in the supply of animal protein for Latin America, has been considered at some 5 million additional tons per year. Of this figure 3.5 million could come from marine fisheries and some 1.5 million from aqua-culture. Some 750 000 ha of ponds and lagoons will have to be brought under production for this and this would require an investment cost close to U.S. $ 750 million.
As regards aquaculture the Bank has prepared, in cooperation with FAO, a first report on the general situation of the sub-sector in each country of the region. The report contains basic information on the potential, limitations and nature of future development. The Bank has partially financed, in the last two years, two aquaculture projects: one in Colombia, as part of a Regional Rural Development Programme; and the other in El Salvador, as part of the National Fishery Development Programme.
7.8 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
The United Nations Development Programme and FAO have been engaged in the provision of technical assistance for aquaculture development for over two decades. Initially the projects mainly consisted of the assignment of one or two specialists to make feasibility studies or conduct experiments or demonstrations. In the course of time, the scope and size of projects have increased. Currently the number of operational projects executed by FAO is 28, with a total funding of U.S. $ 21.6 million, plus more than double that amount in governmental counterpart contributions. In addition, there are some nine pipeline projects in various stages of negotiation with external funding of U.S. $ 7.7 million. As shown below, a good proportion of these projects are solely devoted to aquaculture and the others have aquaculture as a major activity.
Projects devoted solely to aquaculture
Projects including aquaculture as a major activity
No.
U.S.$ ('000)
No.
U.S.$ ('000)
Operational
Pipeline
Seventy-five percent of these projects are financed by UNDP, 11 percent through multi-bilateral arrangements and 8 percent by FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme. The others are supported by FAO's Freedom from Hunger Campaign or the United Nations Sahelian Office.
UNDP has been, and continues to be, the main funding agency for FAO-executed aqua-culture projects. FAO, besides contributing funds for certain types of small-scale projects, provides the support services required for the implementation of the field projects, including technical backstopping. FAO, under its Regular Programme, organizes short-term technical advice and assistance, organization of training courses, seminars, workshops, etc., provides for international forums for pooling of experience, dissemination of information, technical servicing of regional fishery bodies, etc.
Inter-regional and regional projects
A list of the on-going and pipeline projects is given below.
A. UNDP-funded projects
Inter-regional
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (INT/76/016)
Regional
Establishment of a Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture, Brazil (RLA/76/010)
South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, The Philippines (RAS/74/013)
Preparation of an Integrated Plan for the Development of the Inland Fisheries of the Sahel Zone (TF-RAF.104.UNSO)
Fisheries Development of Lake Chad (RAF/71/273)
Regional Aquaculture Training and Research in Africa, Nigeria (RAF/76/009) (pipeline)
Establishment of a Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (RAS/76/003) (pipeline)
National
Tuna and Bait Fish Resources Evaluation, Gilbert Island (GIL/75/002)
Brackishwater Shrimp and Milkfish Culture Applied Research and Training, Indonesia (INS/72/003)
Fisheries Development (Aquaculture), Malaysia (MAL/77/007)
Integrated Fisheries and Fish Culture Development, Nepal (NEP/73/025)
Brackishwater Aquaculture Development and Training, The Philippines (PHI/75/005)
Shrimp Culture and Production, Vietnam (SRV/76/007)
Programme for the Expansion of the Freshwater Prawn Farming Industry, Thailand (THA/75/008)
Programme for the Formulation of Pond Management Techniques, Thailand (THA/75/012)
Fish Culture Extension, Central African Empire (CAF/76/007)
Development of Fish Culture and Inland Fisheries, Ivory Coast (INC/77/003)
Development of Coastal Aquaculture, Kenya (KEN/77/014)
Development of Inland Fisheries and Fish Culture, Madagascar (MAG/76/002)
Fishery Expansion Project, Malawi (MAL/75/019)
Inland Water Fishery Development, Colombia (COL/71/552)
Investigation and Integrated Fisheries Development, Mexico (MEX/77/002)
Development of Fisheries, Algeria (ALG/77/001)
Development of Fish Culture, Hungary (HUN/71/512)
Intensification of Freshwater Fish Culture and Training, India (IND/75/031) (pipeline)
Coastal Aquaculture Demonstration and Training, Malaysia (MAL/77/008) (pipeline)
Inland Fisheries Development, Pakistan (PAK/74/021) (pipeline)
Inland Fisheries Training School, Nigeria (NIG/74/019) (pipeline)
Freshwater Fish Culture, Nigeria (NIG/75/059) (pipeline)
B. FAO/TCP-funded projects
Mariculture Development in the Northeast of Brazil (6/BRA/03/M)
Piscicultura como principal fuente proteica en la zona indígena en Panamá (6/PAN/03)
Pilot Project for Intensified Aquaculture Production, Egypt (6/EGY/02/T)
C. Projects funded from multi-bilateral sources
Fisheries Training and Extension, Bangladesh (TF/BGD/5) (NORAD)
Provision of Preserved Fish Pituitary Glands, Nepal (TF/NEP/18 CFH)
Research and Development of Inland Fisheries, Mozambique (TF/MOZ/6) (SIDA)
Recycling of Domestic Wastes through Fish Culture, India (TF/IND/141) (NORAD) (pipeline)
Reservoir Fisheries Development and Fish Culture Extension, Indonesia (TF/INS/34) (Netherlands) (pipeline)
The above list does not include the projects that are being formulated or those that have already been taken up for direct negotiation between funding agencies and the recipient countries. The scope and operation of the inter-regional and regional projects are briefly described below.
The main phase of the inter-regional project, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, was launched in 1977, after two years of preparatory work which consisted mainly of:
(i) the organization of three regional planning workshops to prepare national development plans and identify requirements of external assistance;
(ii) the organization of a world conference on aquaculture, and;
(iii) the formulation and negotiation of the main phase activities of the Programme.
The initial objectives of the main phase of the Programme are:
(i) strengthening national capabilities in implementing aquaculture development and promoting regional and inter-regional cooperation among developing countries, particularly in the field of research and training;
(ii) assisting in the establishment of regional research and training centres in Africa, Asia and Latin America;
(iii) providing multidisciplinary assistance for undertaking feasibility studies and formulating and implementing pilot and large-scale production programmes, and;
(iv) promoting investment in aquaculture through working arrangements with financing agencies, governments and private industry.
Since these activities are to a large extent an expansion of FAO's own Regular Programme and the unification of activities would enable the Organization to give expanded support for field activities, the entire aquaculture activities carried out by FAO, particularly those relating to field projects, have been integrated. The Programme also participates in the execution of the aquaculture elements of other inter-regional projects, viz. International Indian Ocean Fishery Survey and Development Programme, Development of Fisheries in the Eastern Central Atlantic, and Development of Fisheries in the Western Central Atlantic.
The Programme has, during its short span of life, fielded a number of missions to countries requesting assistance for identifying opportunities, formulating projects and implementing them. Special mention may be made of a nation-wide seed production project in India and fish culture development projects in Egypt and Kenya which are now being negotiated for World Bank financing. Pilot projects have been formulated and are being implemented through the Programme in Egypt and Kenya, to prepare for large-scale investment projects.
The three regional projects relating to the establishment of research and training facilities listed, were formulated in implementation of recommendations made by a number of regional and international meetings. The Regional Centre for Aquaculture Research and Training in Latin America is being established in the State of São Paulo in Brazil, with the main Centre in Pirassununga and sub-centres in Cananeia and Campos de Jordão. The construction work is expected to be completed before the end of the year and the Centre would commence work in January 1979. Besides multidisciplinary systems-oriented research on selected aquaculture systems that have immediate application in the region, the Centre will also offer a one-year training course for senior-level aquaculturists in all aspects of aquaculture with special emphasis on practical work. The Centre will have facilities for collection, processing and dissemination of information.
A Regional Centre for Aquaculture Research and Training in Africa is being established in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. Pending the completion of necessary construction work, the facilities at an existing institution in the neighbourhood (Rural Development Training Centre in Aluu and the Brackishwater Experimental Station in Buguma) will be used for initiating the Centre's work, particularly training. The general pattern of work of the Centre will be as in the Latin American Centre, but training will be offered both in English and French.
The regional project for the establishment of a network of aquaculture centres in Asia will be initiated with the establishment of three Lead Centres, in The Philippines, Thailand and India. Systems-oriented research on the culture of milkfish, mullets and shrimps will be carried out in the Aquaculture Department of the South East Asia Fishery Development Centre. The Freshwater Research and Training Centre of the Central Inland Fishery Research Institute in Dhauli, State of Orissa, India, will carry out research on culture of Indian and Chinese carps, systems of culture in undrainable freshwater ponds and extensive culture of carps in reservoirs. The National Inland Fisheries Institute in Bangkok will carry out research on pond culture of freshwater prawns, catfish, Puntius, murrels, eels and the culture of oysters and mussels. The Philippine Lead Centre will organize a one-year aqua-culture training course as in the other regional centres and the Centre in India will
establish a system of collection, storage and dissemination of information for the benefit of the whole region.
During the second phase of all the three regional projects, a selected number of national centres will be strengthened and closely linked to the regional or lead centres for the testing of technologies developed at the centres and training of extension personnel, ensuring a free exchange of experience and expertise.
The South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, which serves the southeast Asian countries, had a major element of aquaculture work. In its future phase, the emphasis will be on the development of aquaculture as part of small-scale coastal fishery development.
New regional aquaculture projects for the Mediterranean Region and for the Middle East are now in the process of formulation. Similarly, a number of new national projects are also under formulation.
During discussions on the implementation of FAO-executed projects, the question of continuation of activities after the termination of external assistance was raised. Such follow-up activities obviously depend on the nature of the project executed. By citing the example of the regional (group country) project on fish culture research and training implemented in the Central African Empire, Gabon, Congo (Brazzaville) and Cameroon, it was explained that often research projects of the type implemented earlier were followed by national extension projects for the application of the results of research undertaken.
The Philippine representative asked for clarification of the procedure that would be followed in the development of the Lead Centre in the Philippines as envisaged in the UNDP/FAO Regional Project for the Establishment of a Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia. It was explained that the project document had already been sent to the participating governments of the region for their comments and endorsement. If the document were endorsed by an adequate number of governments and based on that, UNDP approved the project, a small mission would be sent to the countries involved, including the Philippines, to prepare detailed memoranda of understanding between FAO and the participating institutions. The Philippine representative pointed out that since the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department is a sub-regional institution, the approval of its Council would be required for the Department's participation.
Such approval could be sought only when the final approval of the project by UNDP was assured. He also commented on the relatively small amount of funding available from UNDP sources for this project. In response it was pointed out that even though the funding for regional activities is small, the institutions selected have already benefited from considerable external funding for the development of physical facilities and it is believed that with small additional inputs and a proper programme, very useful work of value to the region as a whole could be carried out. Further, the project is so designed as to attract and utilize additional funding for carrying out expanded activities. This also applies to the strengthening of national aquaculture centres that will participate in the network earlier than anticipated in the project document. As the emphasis in the project is on the execution of specific activities rather than supporting selected institutions, it should be
possible to make changes in the institutions to be developed as Lead Centres if it becomes necessary.
In connexion with the establishment of a network of aquaculture centres in Asia, the attention of the meeting was drawn to the recommendations made by the IDRC Mission in its report to the TAC and the view expressed at the last TAC meeting in Nairobi that there is overlap of proposed activities and a need to coordinate and integrate the activities of various bodies engaged in aquaculture research and development in the region. Neither the IDRC Mission report nor the TAC meeting report were available to the meeting for study. Whether there is a real overlap of activities or not, could not be examined, but it was recognized that such an image prevails. It was suggested that efforts should be made to bring together the agencies involved for the purpose of harmonizing various new initiatives and on-going activities.
<section>8</section>
8. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Annex I - Programme
Annex II - List of Participants
Annex III - List of IFS Grants for Research on Aquaculture, 1974-77
The meeting noted that governments and aid-giving agencies have not yet given enough priority to aquaculture and everything possible should be done to get the importance of this sector fully recognized. It is essential to inform policy makers of the potential contribution of aquaculture to the protein food supply of the world during the next two decades. Compilation and dissemination of information on successful aquaculture projects in an appropriate form would be of considerable value in this regard. Services of a capable technical writer capable of describing the results of projects in lay-man's language would be necessary for this purpose. It was mentioned that the IDRC Aquaculture Mission report lists a number of successful projects in Asia, based on which suitable write-ups may be prepared. FAO, in cooperation with USAID, should take the initiative in this regard.
It was recognized that the present meeting, the first one held to discuss aid programmes in aquaculture, was very useful for the exchange of views and information. A free flow of information between multilateral and bilateral donors could greatly contribute to better utilization of available aid resources. Further meetings of this type with greater participation of donor agencies should be considered, possibly in conjunction with COFI or FAO regional fishery body meetings. Meantime, available relevant information on approved and pipeline aid projects should be compiled by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) and distributed as regular issuances to the agencies concerned. The meeting noted that there may be differences in policies between aid agencies regarding release of information on pipeline or even on-going projects. While all efforts should be made to achieve completeness in the coverage of projects, even incomplete information would be of
value.
The meeting was not able to discuss the details of the information to be collected but suggested that a small group may be asked to prepare a suitable questionnaire. This group could assist in determining the format and frequency of the issuances to be prepared for distribution.
The meeting did not attempt to negotiate the funding or implementation of specific projects, but the organization of aquaculture research on a regional basis received some special attention. Based on the accounts of different initiatives in this regard, it was agreed that discussions among donors concerned would be most valuable in developing a rational and harmonized approach. The UNDP representative was requested to explore the possibility of a unified approach by bilateral and multilateral donors to provide broad-scale financial support for aquaculture development.
Annex I - Programme
FAO/UNDP AD-HOC CONSULTATION ON AID FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
La Toja (Pontevedra), Spain
20-23 June 1978
PROGRAMME
Tuesday, 20 June
Registration
Inauguration
Adoption of the Agenda and arrangements for the Consultation
Review of aid requirements for aquaculture development
- ditto -
Wednesday, 21 June
Review of the aid programmes of international agencies
Review of bilateral aid programmes
Review of aid programmes of non-government agencies
Talk on the mussel farming industry in Galicia - arranged by the Host Government
Thursday, 22 June
Visit to shellfish farms and laboratories
Visit to shellfish depuration and processing plants
Friday, 23 June
Coordination of future aid for aquaculture development
Conclusions and closing of the Consultation
Annex II - List of Participants
FAO/UNDP AD-HOC CONSULTATION ON AID FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
La Toja (Pontevedra), Spain
20-23 June 1978
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
DONORS
Germany
Rolf Rahe
Fisheries Biologist, Dept. 123
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Dag-Hammarskjöld-weg 1
D-6236 Eschborn 1
IDB
Julio Luna
Chief, Fishery Section
Department of Project Analysis
Inter-American Development Bank
Washington, D.C.
U.S.A.
IDRC
W.H.L. Allsopp
Associate Director (Fisheries)
International Development Research Centre
University of British Colombia
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1L4
Canada
IFS
Jacques Gaillard
Project Secretary
International Foundation for Science
Sibyllegatan 47
114 42 Stockholm
Sweden
Sweden
R. Rosenberg
Assistant Professor
Marine Research Laboratory
Lysekil
U.S.A.
C.P. Idyll
Chief, Division of International Fisheries Development and Services
National Marine Fisheries Services
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce
3300 Whitehaven St.
Washington D.C. 20235
USAID
Richard Neal
Aquaculture Advisor
DS/AGR/F, AID
State Department
Washington D.C. 20523
U.S.A.
World Bank
Alfredo Sfeir Younis
World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington D.C. 20433
U.S.A.
PARTICIPATING COUNTRIES
Brazil
Fuad Alzuguir
Eng. Agrónomo, SUDEPE
I.M. Agricultura
Brasilia - DF
Paulo Petraquini Greco
Secretaria Agricultura
São Paulo
India
V.G. Jhingran
Director
Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute
Barrackpore, via Calcutta
Philippines
Juanito Malig
Assistant Director
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Manila
Q.F. Miravite
Executive Director
Aquaculture Department
SEAFDEC
Manila
Elizabeth Samson
Executive Director
Fishery Industry Development Council
Manila
Philippines - Observers
Z.B. Balangue
Tigbauan, Iloilo
J.C. Madamba
Los Baños
Spain
Manuel González Vidal
Gerente Plan
Plan de Explotación Marisquera de Galicia, Laboratorio Plan Marisquero
Villagarcia de Arosa
Camilo Isorna Artime
Director Laboratorio Central Plan
Plan de Explotación Marisquera de Galicia
Villagarcia de Arosa
F. López Capont
Tecnología Pesquera
Ciencias
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela
Santiago de Compostela
Jose Martínez Romero
Gerente Plan
Plan de Explotación Marisquera
Cultivos Marinos Regio Suratlántica
Cadiz
Jose Manuel Pérez Rodríguez
Jefe Sección Biológia Plan
Plan de Explotación Marisquera
Cultivos Marinos Regio Suratlántica
Cadiz
Héctor Quiroga
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
P.O. Box 130
La Coruña
Miguel Torre Cervigon
Director, Laboratorio La Coruña
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
P.O. Box 130
La Coruña
José Vera Kirchner
Jefe, Sección Cultivos Marinos
Dirección General Pesca Marítima
Ruiz de Alarcon 1
Madrid 14
Thailand
Thiraphan Bhukaswan
Senior Fishery Biologist
Department of Fisheries
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
UNDP
Wm. E. Ripley
Fisheries Advisor
Division of Global and Interegional Programs
United Nations Development Programme
New York
FAO
M.N. Mistakidis
Deputy Programme Leader
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO, Rome
T.V.R. Pillay
Programme Leader
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO, Rome
H. Watzinger
Assistant Director-General
Fisheries Department
FAO, Rome
A. de Wouytch
Secretary
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO, Rome
Annex III - List of IFS Grants for Research on Aquaculture, 1974-77
1. "Rational and controlled exploitation of Alestes in Lake Dossou"
U.S.$ 5 000
Dr. N. Kouassi, Faculté des Sciences, Laboratoire de Zoologie, Université d'Abidjan, B.P. 4322, Abidjan, Ivory Coast
2. "Studies on Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus"
U.S.$ 13 400
Dr. B. Ezenwa, Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research, P.M.B. 12579, Lagos, Nigeria
3. "Induced spawning and larvae rearing of grey mullet"
U.S.$ 8 800
Prof. M.J. Sebastian, Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Kerala Agricultural University, Mannuthy - 680651 Trichur, Kerala, India
3. "Growth parameters of the freshwater mullet"
U.S.$ 13 000
Prof. M.N. Kutty, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641 003, Tamil Nadu, India
18. "Fry production and artificial feeding of Cyprinus carpio and Tilapia"
U.S.$ 6 000
Mr. M.A. Borhan, Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries, 101 Kasr el Eini Street, Cairo, Egypt
19. "Captivity growth and induced spawning of the nicuro (Pimelodus clarias)"
U.S.$ 6 000
Mr. A.J. Brugman, INDERENA, Apartado Aéreo 17798, Bogota, Colombia
20. "Productivity studies of mullets"
U.S.$ 6 700
Dr. D.E.B. Chaytor, Fourah Bay College, University of Sierra Leone, Freetown, Sierra Leone
21. "Rearing of groupers with floating cage culture"
U.S.$ 12 700
Dr. Chua T.E., School of Biological Sciences, Universitii Sains Malaysia, Minden, Penang, Malaysia
22. "Ecology studies on Chrysichthys species in relation to productivity"
U.S.$ 12 800
Dr. A.K. Dia, Centre de Recherche Océanographique, B.P.V. 18, Abidjan, Ivory Coast
23. "Reproduction, nutrition and tolerance of giant freshwater prawns"
U.S.$ 11 700
Dr. Piamsak Menasveta, Department of Marine Science, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
24. "Parasitarian diseases on "sabaló" and "gamitana", artificially raised in Iquitos"
U.S.$ 2 900
Dr. V.E. Paredes Sánchez, Departamento de Piscicultura y Oceanología, Universidad Nacional Agraria, Apartado 456, La Molina, Lima, Peru
25. "Utilization of agricultural by-products for trout breeding"
U.S.$ 3 600
Mr. V. Venturi, Departamento de Piscicultura y Oceanología, Universidad Nacional Agraria, Apartado 456, La Molina, Lima, Peru
46. "A feasibility study of culture and polyculture of the grey mullet (Mugil cephalus L.) in the coastal waters of Sri Lanka"
U.S.$ 14 095
Dr. S.S. de Silva, Department of Zoology, Vidyalankara Campus, University of Sri Lanka, Lekaniya, Sri Lanka
47. "Biosystematic analysis on mullets of Porto Novo"
U.S.$ 6 700
Mr. P.S.R. Reddy, Marine Biological Station, Porto Nova - 608502, Tamil Nadu, India
48. "Induced spawning of mullets in Egyptian ponds"
U.S.$ 7 300
Mr. M.M. Shafik, Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries, 101 Kasr el Eini Street, Cairo, Egypt
49. "Fry rearing of mullets"
U.S.$ 6 000
Dr. I. Ullah T., Institute of Hydrobiology, Department of Zoology, Fen (Science) Faculty, EGE University, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey
91. "Reproductive physiology of fishes with special emphasis on ovarian maturation and artificial spawning"
U.S.$ 7 100
Dr. K.H. Khoo, School of Biological Science, Universitii Sains Malaysia, Minden, Penang, Malaysia
92. "Development of carp and Tilapia hatcheries and identification of suitable sites for introducing fish culture activities in Ethiopia"
U.S.$ 4 670
Dr. F.H. Meskal, Addis Ababa University, P.O. Box 1176, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
93. "Nutritional studies and digestive physiology of air-breathing fishes under different ecological conditions"
U.S.$ 2 500
Dr. S.K. Banerjee, Department of Biochemistry, University College of Science, 35 Ballygunge Circular Road, Calcutta - 700 019, India
94. "Culture of local mollusc species in Malaysia"
U.S.$ 11 200
Dr. M.O. Sivalingam, School of Biological Sciences, Universitii Sains Malaysia, Minden, Penang, Malaysia
95. "Fish culture in cold freshwater ponds in the High Andes Mountains of Columbia"
U.S.$ 6 500
Dr. L. Bucheli, Facultad de Ciencias Agrícolas, Universidad de Nariño, Apartado Aéreo 279, Pasto, Colombia
97. "Studies on cage culture of Tilapia species"
U.S.$ 17 707
Dr. R. Guerrero III, Central Luzon State University College of Inland Fisheries, Munoz, Nueva Ecija 2311, The Philippines
102. "Project scheme on fish culture"
U.S.$ 5 000
Mr. S. Martinez, Instituto de Fomento Nacional, Apartado 629, Managua, Nicaragua
103. "Research on the potential sources of the industrial phycocolloids agar, carrageenan and algin in Tanzania"
U.S.$ 17 950
Dr. K.E. Mshigeni, University of Dar-es-Salaam, P.O. Box 35060, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania
104. "Pond culture of tilapia and other commercially important fish species"
U.S.$ 3 100
Dr. S. Dadzie, University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 30197, Nairobi, Kenya
105. "Improvement of artificial carp fry production in laboratory"
U.S.$ 8 000
Mr. A. Rabelahatra, Département de Recherches Forestières et Piscicoles, Cenraderu, B.P. 904, Tananarive, Madagascar
106. "A new trial of stocking of brackishwater ponds with Lates - Tilapia (predator - prey) combination to get maximal productivity"
U.S.$ 7 500
Mr. P. Joko, Faculty of Fisheries, Bogor Agricultural University, J. Raya Pajajaran 1, Bogor, Indonesia
107. "Physiological studies on culture of chosen prawns (Macrobrachium)"
U.S.$ 5 000
Dr. T.J. Pandian, Department of Biological Sciences, Maduari University, Maduari - 625 021, Tamil Nadu, India
108. "Physiology and culture of the Malaysian freshwater prawn Macrobrachium rosenbergii"
U.S.$ 8 400
Dr. T. Singh, Department of Zoology, University of Malaya, Lembah Pantai, Kuala Lumpur 22-11, Malaysia
109. "Culture of giant freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) in small reservoirs"
U.S.$ 10 196
Dr. Danai Limpadanai, Faculty of Natural Resources, Prince of Songkla University, Haadya, Thailand
110. "Shrimp and prawn culture research, development and conservation"
U.S.$ 5 000
Mr. Suchint Deetae, Department of Marine Science, Faculty of Fisheries, Kasetsart University, Bangkok 9, Thailand
111. "The influence of different kinds of feed during the larval stages of the giant gouramy"
U.S.$ 6 000
Dr. Z. Alamsyah, Fakultas Perikanan, Institut Pertanian Bogor, J. Raya Pajajaran, Bogor, Indonesia
112. "Production ecology of Chilean gelidiales (Rhodophyta)"
U.S.$ 11 400
Dr. B. Santelices, Laboratorio de Zoología, Instituto de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Católica de Chile, Casilla 114-D, Santiago, Chile
137. "Studies on growth, reproduction, nutrition and ecology of local algae of economic importance"
U.S.$ 8 700
Dr. Flora Majid, BCSIR Laboratories, Dacca, Bangladesh
177. "Cage culture of marble goby (Oxyeleotris marmorata, B.) in ponds and mining pools"
U.S.$ 6 000
Dr. Ang Kok-Jee, Universitii Pertanian Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia
178. "Large-scale cultivation techniques of Tilapia andersonii R. and machrochir"
U.S.$ 7 000
Mr. C.A. Mumba, Central Fisheries Research Institute, P.O. Box 100, Chilanga, Zambia
183. "An integrated approach to frog culture - developmental, immunological and ecophysical studies in Rana tigrina"
U.S.$ 3 000
Dr. V.R. Muthukkaruppan, Department of Biological Sciences, Madurai University, Madurai - 625 021, India
189. "Aquaculture of bivalves, crustaceans and fishes using treated sewage"
U.S.$ 7 000
Dr. R, Sen Gupta, National Institute of Oceanography, NIO Post Office, Dona Paula, Goa 403004, India
190. "Control of reproduction of Tilapia nilotica using cage culture"
U.S.$ 5 000
Mr. S. Adang Rifai, Faculty of Agriculture, Padjadjaran University, Bukit Dago Utara, Bandung, Indonesia
191. "Controlled breeding of the catfish, Clarias macrocephalus, and some riverine cyprinids"
U.S.$ 5 600
Dr. Tan S.P., School of Biological Sciences, Universitii Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia
192. "Fertilization of fish ponds and artificial feeding of cultivated fishes"
U.S.$ 8 500
Dr. A. Sheri, Department of Zoology, University of Agriculture, Lyallpur, Pakistan
193. "Induced spawning and larval rearing of mullet (Pisces: Mugilidae)"
U.S.$ 8 000
Mr. L. Alvarez-Lajonchere G., Centro de Investigaciones Marinas, Facultad de Biológica, Universidad de Habana, Ave. la No 2808, Miramar, Habana, Cuba
194. "Development of proper nursery management techniques for fry of Tilapia nilotica and Cyprinus carpio"
U.S.$ 8 000
Dr. T.T. George, Fisheries and Hydrobiological Research Section, P.O. Box 1489, Khartoum, Sudan
231. "Biological means of increasing fish production in ponds"
U.S.$ 8 000
Mr. J. Ochieng, Kenyatta University College, P.O. Box 43844, Nairobi, Kenya
232. "Investigations on the cage culture of fish and the availability of fry in Sri Lanka waters"
U.S.$ 5 150
Prof. K.O. Arudpragasam, Department of Zoology, University of Sri Lanka, Colombo Campus, P.O. Box 1490, Colombo, Sri Lanka
234. "Systems of polyculture of fishes in the warm inland waters of Colombia"
U.S.$ 10 000
Mr. J.M. Solano, Center of Fish Investigations of Córdoba, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Monteria, Colombia
235. "Studies on breeding and seeding techniques suitable for culture and propagation of the giant freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) in Sri Lanka"
U.S. $ 6 300
Dr. H.H. Costa, University of Sri Lanka, Vidyalankara Campus, Kelaniya, Sri Lanka
236. "Studies on the utilization of the by- and waste-products of sericulture in aquaculture"
U.S.$ 5 500
Dr. E.M. Cruz, Central Luzon State University, Muñoz, Nueva Ecija 2311, The Philippines
237. "Study of the fish fauna of the lakes Cohoha and Rweru to evaluate the stocks and to select fish species suitable for aquaculture in ponds"
U.S. $ 6 500
Mr. G. Ntakimazi, Laboratoire de Zoologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Burundi, BP 2700, Bujumbura, Burundi
238. "Inventory and infestation degree of ectoparasites on milkfish (Chanos chanos Forsk.) at Pangkajene (South Sulawesi)"
U.S.$ 5 000
Mr. A. Rantetondok, University of Hasanuddin, Campus Unhas, Baraya, Ujung Pandang, Indonesia
