<title>Traditional Management of Seaweeds in the District of LÃ©on</title>
<section>1</section>
PREPARATION OF THIS PAPER
This document was prepared in collaboration with CNEXO as part of FAO's Regular Programme activities, aimed at assisting fishery administrators and other persons responsible for the management of fisheries. It is one in a series of technical papers relating to the PRACTICES OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT, a list of which you will find at the end of the document.
Distribution:
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional Fisheries Officers
Directors of Fisheries
Selector SM
Fisheries Management Selector
Author
For bibliographic purposes this document should be cited as follows:
Arzel, P., 1984 Traditional management of seaweeds in the district of Leon. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (249):49 p.
ABSTRACT
This document describes and analyzes the customs and practices concerning the exploitation, allocation and conservation of seaweed resources in the area of Léon, one of the provinces of Brittany. It constitutes one of a series of technical documents prepared by the Fishery Policy and Planning Division of FAO on the principles and various methods of fisheries management. The author demonstrates that the community composed of seaweed harvesters of the Léon manages the harvest by establishing, for instance, cutting periods and exploitation rotation, as well as regulating the use of tools and practices which might damage the resources. The study also notes that the allocation and share of resources is ruled by a set of regulations regarding effort and competition in order to ensure a more rational and equitable resource management. The author concludes that this traditional management scheme has promoted the rational exploitation of the seaweed stocks and the involvement of the
community in this exploitation.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The recent extension of their territorial waters to 200 miles by coastal nations promises to have far-reaching effects upon the world's fisheries and opens new perspectives in fishery management. The task of formulating and applying policy in each country will be all the more difficult for lack of practical experience in this new situation. For this reason the Division of Fishery Policy and Planning has decided to prepare a series of technical documents on the principles and various methods of intervention in this domain. Traditional fisheries, however, often possess a valuable heritage of practices and customs of resource exploitation which may remain unknown to both fishery scientists and national administrators. Several reasons for this are:
a) Cultural isolation. Whether one speaks Breton or Tamoul, a similar problem exists: communication with official services is difficult.
b) Geographic isolation. National fisheries are often composed of small groups of fishermen, living on a rocky cliff or a remote island. The difficulty of access increases the difficulties of communication.
c) Economic isolation. Due to geographic isolation, production is dispersed. Usually sold ex-vessel, it never figures in official statistics.
d) Administrative isolation. Because information about production is lacking, the administration has only a limited understanding of the activities of these fishermen.
A fishing community thus isolated organizes and lives of itself. Such a community, composed of the seaweed harvesters of the Léon, is the subject of the current study.
Each of the customs and practices relative to the exploitation, allocation and conservation of seaweed resources may be important in resource management and therefore should be described and interpreted.
The Léon is one of the provinces of Brittany. Due to its linguistic peculiarity and its history as a former bishopric and principality, it is unique among the regions of Brittany.
In this region can be found the greatest abundance of diverse and densely growing marine fauna of the Atlantic littoral. Here, boreal species and those of warmer seas coexist. Here, the southern distribution limits of the former and the northern limits of the latter overlap (Bichard-Breau, 1964).
As fishery resources, these marine plant stocks represent a great advantage: being sedentary and often intertidal, they are more easily exploitable and quantifiable. This abundance of natural attributes makes seaweed harvesting more important in the Léon than elsewhere in France. Today, 90 percent of the national yield comes from North Finistère. Over the years, societies which earn their living by seaweed exploitation have developed a body of laws and customs for the rational organization of this exploitation.
The purpose of this study is to describe these regulations and analyze the reasons for their creation.
<section>3</section>
2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
2.1 Review of seaweed use
2.2 Review of harvesting regulations
2.1 Review of seaweed use
2.1.1 Domestic use
2.1.2 Industrial use
Seaweed harvesting is an age-old activity in the Western world. Seaweed has two uses: domestic and industrial.
2.1.1 Domestic use
2.1.1.1 Fuel
Prior to World War II, seaweed was dried to be used as fuel during the winter. On Batz Island, shore weeds gathered in September were reserved for this purpose. This seaweed was sometimes ground and combined with cow manure. The resulting mixture, or "glaouad", was formed into flat cakes, stuck to the walls of houses, and left to dry.
2.1.1.2 Food for human consumption
In general, authors who write of seaweed as food for human consumption refer to use by northern populations (British Isles, Iceland, Scandinavia). In Brittany, human consumption of seaweed is restricted to a very particular use. Chondrus crispus, dried and bleached, is boiled in milk. As it cools, it jellifies and is similar to flan or custard.
2.1.1.3 Animal feed
Palmaria palmata bears the Breton name "bijin-saout", or "cattle-weed". These seaweeds were widely used as feed for livestock. According to Dizerbo (1974), cows roaming on Batz Island and Sein Island sought out this seaweed to graze on. Sauvageau also observed this in 1920 and remarked that the inhabitants of Ouessant even created paths through the rocks so that their animals could reach the seaweed without the risk of breaking their legs. Palmaria is even used as food in the stables of Sein (Richard, 1958).
These practices are widespread on the Scottish island of Lewis (Hendrick, 1916), in Iceland and the Scandinavian countries.
During World War I, military authorities hoped to use dried seaweed to replace oats and fodder, then in scarce supply. Experiments showed that Fucus could indeed be used, just as we add seaweed meal to livestock feed as a source of vegetable protein today.
2.1.1.4 Fertilizer
In the past, because farmers kept few animals and were unable to accumulate large quantities of manure, it became customary to use seaweed as a fertilizer. Seaweed of the genus Fucus were most highly prized. Agricultural use of seaweed is recorded as early as the 14th century. In the 19th century, collection of shore seaweed gave rise to a veritable industry, strengthened by the 20th century appearance of railroads in the Saint-Politaine region. Seaweed arrived from every coastal area to provide fertilizer for local agriculture. The development of chemical fertilizers, however, caused this industry to decline.
2.1.2 Industrial use
2.1.2.1 Glass production
Soda is one of the ingredients used in the synthesis of glass. Wood ash was gradually replaced as a source of soda by the ash of certain coastal plants of the Salicaceae family. By the end of the 17th century, glassmakers in the Cherbourg region replaced these plants with seaweed ash. Not until after 1790 were these products replaced by the industrial soda produced by the new process perfected by LeBlanc.
2.1.2.2 Iodine
In 1812, an army chemist by the name of Courtois, experimenting with seaweed ash in the processing of saltpeter, discovered a new substance which he named iodine. Its therapeutic uses were soon discovered. The chemical industry became involved and, as early as 1825, the Couturier factory of Cherbourg was producing 400 kg of iodine per year. The first factory specializing in the production of iodine from seaweed ash was founded in 1829 at Conquet. After 1860, there were a dozen factories producing 60 to 70 tons of iodine per year. Production then stabilized and has remained at this level.
2.1.2.3 Alginates
Although Stanford first isolated algin in 1883, it was not until the early 20th century that a small-scale algin industry was created at Pleubian in the Côtes-du-Nord region. This industry was relatively unimportant until the disappearance of iodine factories around 1955-1960. French algin production (1,000 tons annually) has a great deal of competition on the world market at present.
2.1.2.4 Carrageenates
Carrageens, like alginates, are colloidal substances which appeared on the market after 1885-1890. The current reduced harvest of seaweed cannot meet the needs of the carrageen industry, which now relies on imports.
2.2 Review of harvesting regulations
Desouches (1962) informs us that the seacoast was defined as royal property under Charlemagne, although the principle of royal sovereignty over the coastline was not applied everywhere. In Brittany, Article 8 of the "Laws and Customs of the Principality of the Léon" specified that residents of coastal parishes had the right to collect both driftweed and shoreweed (Hevin, 1693).
In 1681, Colbert issued the important Marine Ordinance, intended to promote the organization of a French Merchant Marine, the development of the fleet and port system, and to define the status of French seamen. The Ordinance is composed of five Books. Title X of the fourth Book contains a special passage concerning seaweeds.
Title X of the Ordinance:
Pertaining to the harvesting of seaweed
Article I - The Inhabitants of coastal parishes will assemble on the first Sunday of the month of January of each year, following the parish mass, in order to determine the opening and closing dates of the annual harvest of the seaweed found in the sea adjoining their territory.
Article II - The assembly will be convoked by the church wardens or parish treasurers, and the decision of the assembly will be posted at the principal door of the church. Failure to do so will result in a fine of 10 livres (pounds).
Article III - The inhabitants are forbidden: to cut the seaweed during the night and at times other than those determined by the community, to cut the seaweed elsewhere than along the length of the coast of their parish, or to transport it to other territories, failure resulting in a fine of 50 pounds and confiscation of their horses and harnesses.
Article IV - It is forbidden to all lords of coastal properties to appropriate for themselves any portion of the rocks where seaweed grows, to prevent their vassals from gathering it during the open season, to demand anything of them in return for the right to gather it, or to allow non-residents of the parish to participate, failure resulting in punishment for misappropriation.
Article V - The right to gather any and all seaweed cast upon the shore by the tides, and to transport it where they will, is granted to all.
Subsequent changes in regulations are many. Laws regulating the actual harvesting of seaweed (see Appendix) evolved gradually, often in response to the demands of those concerned. Although the open season was sometimes determined arbitrarily (as in 1731), the need was recognized for a more flexible system which would allow the municipalities themselves to determine the dates best suited to local conditions. As the Revolution abolished privilege, the revolutionary governments decided that seaweed was a public resource which should be accessible to all. This position was later abandoned, however, and seaweed once again became the property of coastal populations only (Decree of 18 Thermidor, Year 10).
Among the measures which should be mentioned are the allocation of bottom weed to registered sailors (1853) and the official definition of a coastal resident (1890).
<section>4</section>
3. TRADITIONAL EXPLOITATION
3.1 The Léon Region
3.2 Seaweed resources
3.3 Means of production
3.1 The Léon Region
Figure 1. The Léon, a province of Brittany
The Léon is a small province of Brittany which includes the arrondissements of Brest and Morlaix. Geographically, the area corresponds to the northwest point of the Breton peninsula. It is a rather low plateau, deeply carved by tides which have created the deep estuaries so characteristic of this region. The plateau is a shale-covered platform, 1 to 5 km wide, which extends under the sea to the isobath-40. Strong currents and gale force winds are typical of the sea off these coasts.
The Léon is densely populated (100 inhabitants per km^2). The inhabitants are peasants, fishermen, and seamen in the navy and merchant marine. The same socio-professional division is found in the littoral communes situated where the Arvor, a narrow land stretching along the coast, meets the Menez, an inland region.
3.2 Seaweed resources
The conditions present along the Breton coast are favourable to the development of all varieties of seaweed. The rocky bottom essential to seaweed growth is found on the ocean floor and also in intertidal areas. Because the various seaweed species have different ecological needs, their populations grow in successive layers or bands:
1) The Pelvetia caniculata and Fucus spiralis band is at high-sea, spring-tide level and is wave-beaten.
2) The Ascophyllum band. Ascophyllum nodosum is found in sheltered areas at mid-high, spring-tide level.
3) The Fucus vesiculosis band. Fucus vesiculosis lives at the same level as Ascophyllum nodosum but in a more open, wave-beaten location.
4) The Fucus serratus band. This seaweed is found below the preceding seaweeds, reaching as far as the low neap-tide level. It tends to prefer calmer areas.
5) The Himanthalia elongata band is found in both rough and sheltered areas, beginning at the low neap-tide level. Chondrus crispus and Gigartina stellata, two valuable red seaweeds, occur together here.
6) The Laminaria band. Laminaria digitata occurs beginning at the low-tide level, coefficient 90. It prefers calm zones and is replaced by Laminaria hyperborea in more open areas. Laminaria ochroleuca can be found below these two seaweeds, to a depth of 10 metres above the sea floor. The following diagrams by J. Y. Floch (1964) illustrate this zonation (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Zonation of seaweed populations. J.Y. Floch (1964)
A quantitative inventory of littoral flora can be obtained through research of the kind done in 1967 in the Molène Archipelago by J. Y. Floch, U.B.O., and now being conducted on the coasts of Brittany by Perez, et al., of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries.
3.3 Means of production
3.3.1 Harvesting methods
3.3.2 Labour force
3.3.3 Production
3.3.4 Fleet transformation
3.3.1 Harvesting methods
3.3.1.1 Driftweed
Large quantities of seaweed torn from the bottom by winter winds are left on shore by the tides. A considerable amount of beached driftweed, or cast, is also seen in the spring when Laminaria hyperborea fronds are shed and regenerated. Professional harvesters and also farmers seeking inexpensive fertilizer are mobilized for the collection of this seaweed. The professionals prefer drying these seaweeds to be burned later to make "soda".
3.3.1.2 Shore seaweed
a) Black seaweed. Throughout history, black seaweed has been the most sought after seaweed variety. Since the 19th century, it has been reserved for agricultural use. During open harvest season, virtually every member of the community is involved, some using sickles to cut the seaweed and others carrying it to the cart tracks to be taken away. The very poor transport their harvest in baskets.
b) Lichen. Harvesting lichen is a recent activity in Brittany, begun in the 1890s on the initiative of German industrialists. It began in the Côtes-du-Nord, eventually spread to the Finistère region, and reached from Picardie to Oléron by 1920. The only materials required for this totally manual harvest are sacks and baskets in which to collect the clumps of lichen torn from the rocks. Later the harvest is spread on the dunes to dry and bleach.
3.3.1.3 Bottom seaweed
Boats are usually used to harvest bottomweed. The tool used, called a guillotine, is a sickle-like blade mounted on a handle 3 to 4 metres long. The sloop-type boats used are about 6 metres long. Their rigging consists of a staysail and a topsail, lowered during the harvest to make less work. Dry-cutting is possible at times of very low tide. The crew leaves the boat moored at some distance from the coast and then proceeds to cut the seaweed with sickles. When the tide turns, the harvest is loaded into the tender and transferred to the boat.
3.3.1.4 Yield estimates
a) Driftweed. It is difficult to estimate driftweed yield because the abundance of the cast, or drift, varies. During an average morning's work, however, one team can remove 8 to 10 cartloads, or approximately 5 to 6 tons of wet seaweed.
b) Rockweeds. During the first days of the season, a family of five or six can usually collect 12 to 15 cartloads of black seaweed per day. This is the equivalent of 7 to 9 tons of fresh seaweed.
For lichen, the estimate is only approximately 100 to 150 kg per person per day, because these seaweeds are small and must be gathered by hand.
c) Bottom or Oarweeds. Yield obviously varies from one region to another, but on the mainland, a single harvester with a boat is able to produce at least three cardloads of Laminaria per day, or about 2 tons. Yield is greater in the islands. By the end of the season, an industrious professional will have produced 100 tons of fresh seaweed on the continent or 250 tons of fresh seaweed from the islands.
3.3.2 Labour force
It is usually a simple matter to quantify the manpower and fleet involved in a fishery. In the case of the seaweed industry, this task is complicated by the occasional addition to the professional labour force of farmers, fishermen and also women, children and retired persons. Resource abundance determines the numbers involved. A rough estimate places the number of professional seaweed harvesters in the Léon during the year between World Wars I and II at about 2,500. Since 1950, their number has been recorded and can be found in the Appendix.
3.3.3 Production
Production statistics are often inaccurate. Product classification, category grouping and units of measure (ton or m^3) are not standardized. Dry and fresh weights are cited indiscriminately and allowance is rarely made for seaweed processing.
Yield statistics, if available, might not be truly representative as it is unlikely that the tonnage of shore seaweed taken directly for use as fertilizer would be included. The annual Fucus harvest in the Léon before World War II is estimated at 30 to 40,000 tons of fresh seaweed. The annual production of 60 to 70 tons of iodine required about 200,000 tons of fresh Laminaria. Post-war production is better known (Appendix) and most originates in the Léon region, whose contribution has risen from 50 percent of the total in 1920 to 90 percent today.
3.3.4 Fleet transformation
Post-war modernization of the seaweed industry began with the motorization of the fleet. The next step, in 1960, was the adoption of a new hand tool. The "scoubidou", which pulls seaweed out rather than cutting it, increased yield considerably.
In their effort to eliminate manual labour, seaweed fishermen first tried in 1960 to vacuum from the bottom seaweed which had first been cut by a diver using a sickle. When this failed a new method was sought. A second experiment, begun in 1967, used a steel hull fitted with a hydraulic crane. The crane had a strong metal arm ending in a hook which rotated under water to pull out seaweed. As the crane moved in the opposite direction above the ship's hold, the seaweed dropped and was stacked. Seventy-five of these units have been built since 1971. The present fleet is limited to this number for commercial reasons (see 7.2.3 Bottomweed).
<section>5</section>
4. SOURCES AND METHODS
4.1 Field inquiry
4.2 Bibliographical research
Data upon which this report was based was compiled from both field inquiry and bibliographical research. We will examine each source in turn.
4.1 Field inquiry
A preliminary inquiry located those regions where customs and regulations had been preserved and those where they had lost their importance. Further field research concentrated on those areas where tradition remains strong, limiting further study of areas where tradition had been lost or weakened to only one or two communes.
The inquiries conducted in the Léon concerned 21 of these 32 coastal communities (Figure 3). Thirty-eight informants were contacted and the archives of 16 town halls were consulted. The interviews took place in homes and former work places. They were conducted in French, in Breton, or in a combination of the two and followed a pre-established but not inflexibile pattern.
Figure 3. Scope of the research. The communes marked are those in which the inquiry was conducted
4.2 Bibliographical research
One bibliographic source, the municipal ordinance, provides an invaluable bridge between field inquiry and pure bibliographical research. A vivid record of the local past and present, these ordinances are mayoral decisions recorded in a special register and carry the force of law within the commune. This type of municipal decree differs from the more widely applied decisions of the municipal council as a body.
Bibliographic research is important because it records facts and events beyond the memory of those living. Our memory is in fact quite short, each generation remembering little of the history of the generation preceding it. Because our informants could furnish little information about the time before the early 20th century it was necessary to go back in time by means of bibliographical research.
Reference to this extensive bibliography is made as needed throughout the text. All titles referred to are found in the final bibliography, although they are only a few of those available.
Unloading seaweed at the Aber Wrach'h in the early 1900s. Notice the family's involvement in the harvest, rare in sea-related industries, where women and children usually may not go on board.
A modern seaweed boat returning to port with a load of about 10 tons of Laminaria. L'Alber-Ildut, 1981
Condition of an Ascophyllum field after the harvest (Tréompan, 1978)
<section>6</section>
5. RESOURCE CONSERVATION
5.1 Determining minimal biomass
5.2 Determination of the cutting periods
5.3 Control of harvesting practices
5.4 Substratum maintenance and improvement
5.1 Determining minimal biomass
It is essential to conserve a minimal biomass to ensure stock regeneration after each harvest. After the Fucaceae harvest, however, seaweed fishermen believe that they have left the littoral completely denuded.
To obtain an objective view of the impact of the harvest on a stock, a study was made of exploited zones and also adjacent unexploited control zones. The study showed that only 95 percent of the exploited zones had been harvested, leaving at least 5 percent of the original biomass. The obvious explanation is that it would be a waste of time to collect all the seaweed from rocks that are always covered by a thick seaweed growth.
Whatever the seaweed fishermen may say, the littoral is never entirely exploited. There are areas where harvesting is forbidden, where seaweed is scarce or access difficult or impossible.
A portion of the biomass is therefore always preserved. We do not know if it is sufficient to renew the stock or even what minimal amount of the biomass is needed for stock restoration. Have algologists and phyto-sociologists found answers to these questions?
A few tufts left on the rocks cannot repopulate the shores. Recolonization is accomplished by sexual reproduction when fertilized female gametes are implanted on the bare substratum.
A minimal biomass able to produce gametes is therefore a requisite for repopulation. Because there is no record of a disappearance or rarification of the resource, it can be assumed that the minimal biomass has always been preserved, even if undefined, throughout the history of seaweed exploitation.
The Applied Algology Department of the I.S.T.P.M. recently determined a yield quota for Laminaria, limiting the maximum harvest on the North Brittany coast to 40,000 tons of fresh seaweed. Although study of minimal biomass has just begun, they suggest that harvests surpassing this limit might impede resource renewal.
Does this scientific view contradict that of seaweed harvesters? The seaweed harvester is both peasant and sailor and understands farming. He understands that there is no spontaneous generation; that no seaweed will grow if the coasts are truly left bare. For him, the exploitation of a seaweed bed and of a prairie are comparable. The concept of resource conservation exists for the harvester but is interpreted differently.
The possibilities of stock regeneration seem infinite. "Even when everything is cut, it grows back" they say. "Even the farmer cuts the hay every year". The first statement is based on the idea that the tendril remaining after the harvest is enough to allow the plant to grow again, but this assertion is false. The growth zone is located at the junction of the frond and the stipe in Laminaria, and is apical in Fucaceae.
The parallel drawn between land and sea leads to the belief that annual harvesting actually maintains the seaweed bed, encouraging growth, and that unexploited seaweed beds may be lost, like fallow land gone to seed.
Although biologically unsound, the seaweed harvester's understanding of resource renewal led to the gradual adoption of measures intended to ensure rational resource exploitation. The question is whether these measures have had a positive impact on exploitation or have simply provided a framework for its management.
To answer this question we will first examine existing measures as a whole. They can be divided into the following four groups:
a) cutting period and age at harvest;
b) harvesting methods;
c) maintenance and improvement of the substratum; and
d) shore maintenance.
5.2 Determination of the cutting periods
5.2.1 Seaweed maturity
5.2.2 Perception of need - inserting the harvest in the annual work calendar
5.2.3 Cutting periods
5.2.4 Exploitation rotation
The determination of the cutting periods responds to biological and also social imperatives.
5.2.1 Seaweed maturity
There exists two concepts of seaweed maturity: that of the scientist and that of the seaweed harvester.
5.2.1.1 The viewpoint of the population dynamics specialist
The population dynamics specialist can use models combining natural mortality and weight increase to define the moment at which the population reaches its maximum weight. By varying age at first catch and effort, he determines optimal exploitation conditions. In this case, however, the fundamental difference between the plan and animal worlds should be noted. For seaweeds, negative growth is normal. It appears at two levels, first over an annual period and then over the life span of the seaweed (about 5 years for Laminaria).
Each year, after the emission of spores, the plant tissues which held them are disorganized. They are dilacerated by the agitation of the sea, causing apical wear. The leaf is broken and weight is lost.
Moreover, while the stipe continues to grow, the leaf reaches its maximum length by about the third year. During the third and fourth years, apical wear overcomes growth and size decreases progressively.
Therefore the plan reaches maximum weight during the third year. It is important to learn whether this is also true of cohorts. This, however, requires data on natural mortality not currently available, and this aspect of the study could not be pursued.
Even when growth and mortality parameters are known, they apply to the given area only. They vary considerably depending on where the seaweed is grown:
a) submerged or exposed zone;
b) depth;
c) exposure (wave-beaten of sheltered mode);
d) amount of sunshine received; and
e) hydrodynamism (currents).
Even for the same population these factors vary, demonstrating how difficult it is to obtain a global view of biological phenomena.
5.2.1.2 The viewpoint of the seaweed harvester
The seaweed fisherman's perception of these phenomena is different. For him, the concept of seaweed maturity is not globalized but related to the plant's seasonal evolution, which he understands quite well.
As the season opens at the end of April, the first loads of Laminaria are not very dense. Most seaweed fishermen believe that Laminaria increase their weight by one-third during the course of the season, attaining maximum weight in July or August. The names they use to refer to the first seaweed harvested describe it as "tali moan" and "tali dister" (thin or skinny Laminaria), and "paper butum" (cigarette paper). "It loses all its weight drying" they say. "It shrivels away" and "it isn't ripe".
The mayors responsible for choosing harvest dates in each commune are aware of these problems. In 1904, the mayor Landunvez spoke of these plant resources in the following terms in a request that the Marine Minister modify regulations then in force:
Seaweed can certainly be compared to wild prairie grass; it has its periods of germination, of growth, of blossoming and maturity. Its harvest should be authorized only from the moment when this sea grass reaches a certain development, in April or early May.
Similar ideas are expressed by Mr. E. de Poulpiquet, mayor of Plouguerneau, in the preamble of an ordinance regulating seaweed harvesting in 1811:
Because it is of major importance to the community that the cutting or harvesting of black seaweed take place at a fixed date acceptable to the community and because this sea grass is most valuable when it has reached full maturity but deteriorates and loses all value if cut in any amount and at any season.....
5.2.2 Perception of need - inserting the harvest in the annual work calendar
Determination of the open season is not influenced by questions of maturity alone. Intemperate weather imposes other constraints.
5.2.2.1 Allowance for drying time
Because adequate sunshine is essential to the proper drying of seaweed, the open season must occur in the summer months.
5.2.2.2 Importance of plowing time
In the Upper Léon region, it was customary to open the seaweed harvest in February. This cutting was well timed to provide fertilizer for the fields about to be plowed. The objection that the seaweed harvested at this time was not fully developed was countered by the argument that the longer the seaweed grew, the greater the risk that it would be torn out by bad weather. According to this reasoning, waiting until May would result in waste of the resource.
Our own observation is that while Fucus are certainly present in the cast, they are not a major portion of it, even today when no harvest may take place for several years in certain areas. The management practice mentioned above is therefore based on faulty reasoning.
5.2.2.3 Other needs
On Batz Island, a harvest regularly took place in September to stock fuel for the winter.
5.2.3 Cutting periods
5.2.3.1 Opening the season
The Fucus harvest takes place in May when these seaweeds reach full development. The seaweed fishermen of Plouguerneau patiently awaited this time in order to offer a product of the highest quality, saying that local farmers were willing to wait and pay more for their product than buy lower priced seaweed elsewhere, earlier.
Ascophyllum reaches maturity near Michaelmas (29 September) and the season is extended to include that date. At Landéda in 1926, the harvest lasted from 17 June to 31 October. The season for Fucacaea was from 14 May to 17 July.
Soon after large-scale exploitation of lichen began off the coasts of Léon in about 1905, it was observed that lichen reached its optimum development in the summer. Dates for the open season were set accordingly.
Seaweed fishermen on the west coast of the Léon region were accustomed to beginning their harvest of Laminaria in mid-April; much sooner than in the Pagan region. Although they knew that the season began too early, and "Eun hanter re abred" (Too soon by half) became a local proverb, these fishermen resigned themselves to this early season in order to shorten the long period of winter inactivity.
Even an early season was an improvement over the previous time, when harvesting occurred throughout the year. It was not until after the war that plant maturity was taken into consideration and the opening date set at 15 April.
5.2.3.2 The length of the open season
Colbert's ordinance of 1681 officially adopts measures long in practice. These allowed each parish to choose the dates and the duration of the shoreweed harvest. These dates usually corresponded to saints' days, as in Porspoder in 1788, where "The seaweed harvest will begin on the Eve of Saint Mark's Day, 26 April, and end on Saint Jean's Day".
The "fabriciens", or parish officials, were careful to choose a date coinciding with a phase of the moon, and therefore a tide.
The review of regulations makes frequent reference to the insistence of certain politicians that these regulations be formulated by a central authority, either monarchic or republican. The last dispositions made before the reform of 1975 established April to June as the harvesting season for shoreweed. Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of the opening and closing dates of the shoreweed season.
The season has been extended during recent years; a relaxation of local discipline which reflects a loss of interest in these seaweeds.
On the other hand, more and more Laminaria are being harvested and the Laminaria season has been shortened. Harvesting was permitted year-round from 1853 until the 1920s, when the opening date was set in mid-April. While in theory the season ended on 31 December, harvesting ceases, for all intents and purposes, after 15 October, when bad weather makes drying too difficult. Some communes officially adopted this date. Moreover, many boats are laid up for the season at this time. The Merchant Marine counts only nine months of navigation per year for seaweed harvesters. It should nonetheless be mentioned that some communes, like Plouarzel and Landéda, decided to set two different dates for the opening of the Laminaria season. In 1954 they were as follows:
Communes
Opening Date
Closing Date
Harvest at sea
Harvest from shore
Plouarzel
15 March
1 June
1 October
Landéda
15 March
1 May
30 October
Lichen are harvested in the summer only; the open season extending from June through September throughout the Léon region. Since 1975, the opening and closing dates have been established at the national level under the jurisdiction of the Director of Maritime Fisheries.
5.2.4 Exploitation rotation
A plan is devised to exploit several sectors, one at a time. The usual practice is to exploit each sector once every two or three years, although this is not universal. In the case of Laminaria, seaweed harvesters understand that the young plants left after each harvest require about two years to develop fully, and will simply shift harvest activity to another sector if the seaweed they find are not sufficiently developed to make harvesting worthwhile. Stocks were large enough to permit this rotation. Average production for a traditional seaweed harvester was approximately 30 tons of dried Laminaria, or 150 tons wet. Based on an average density of 15-20 kg per m^2, one boat requires one hectare per year, which is a relatively small area on the sea.
In the Pagan region, where seaweed harvesters are allotted a family plot for the shoreweed harvest, competition is no problem. The harvester often reserved half of his large plot for the following year, resulting in a bi-annual rotation, or even three or four year rotation in places where seaweed grew slowly.
It can be stated that the practice of seaweed rotation exists but that its application is limited.
Figure 4. Historical evolution of the position in the year and the duration of the shoreweed harvest season.
5.3 Control of harvesting practices
5.3.1 Labour
5.3.2 Gears
5.3.3 Prohibited practices
Resource conservation may also be accomplished by regulation of effort (tools, labour).
5.3.1 Labour
Manpower is sometimes strictly regulated. Each unit is assigned a quota of labourers. A municipal ordinance at Landéda in 1875 stated:
Unless a household is larger, no more than five persons may accompany each horse. No more than eight people may accompany each boat or cart, and all shall be residents of the commune.
5.3.2 Gears
5.3.2.1 Tearing versus cutting
Only cutting tools are permitted, and those which tear out seaweed are prohibited. Seaweed harvesters still believe that the roots are able to regenerate new plants. There are, however, isolated cases of the use of prohibited tools.
"Rastell-houarn" is a common iron garden rake, different from the wooden garden rake called "rastell-an-tevenn" or "rastell-vehan". It may be taken to the shore to gather driftweed but is prohibited when used to pull black seaweed from nearby rocks to be added to driftweed to increase its value. At Landéda, this practice is referred to as "skraba bleo war a c'herreg", or "combing the hair of the rocks".
"Krog-sillad" is a tool formed by a very long handle (3 to 4 metres) and a metal part made of three to five teeth perpendicular to the handle. Its name may vary by region; it is called "krog sillad" in the Pagan region, "krog-bad" or "krog-soun" in Porspoder and "krog-dragi" in Batz. This tool is legally used to gather driftweed which has not yet reached the shore. It use is prohibited when it is turned like a corkscrew to wind Laminaria around it and then pulled to tear them from their roots. If this practice was once wide-spread, it is because it seemed advantageous. Prohibition of seaweed tearing raises the interesting question of which method, cutting or tearing, is best adapted to the rational exploitation of marine plant stocks.
This question was considered as early as 1772, when tearing was permitted on the recommendation of three members of the Academy of Sciences, who concluded that "this plant, when cut by sickle, as advised by Article Four of the Declaration of 1731, does not reproduce until the rotting root detaches itself from the rock, whereas after tearing out, filaments remain which reproduce it the following year."
In 1838, Pinchon, De Blois and DeLannigou, of the agricultural society of Morlaix, sought a solution to this problem. They had an experiment conducted by an "intelligent sailor" who reported that "the torn plant grew back larger and more quickly than the cut plant."
Perez (1969) undertook experiments on Laminaria digitata at Porspoder. He chose two zones of equal area (150 m^2) equally rich in seaweed. The Laminaria were harvested by cutting in one zone and by tearing in the other. Perez concluded that "cutting as commonly practised (on the stipe) presents no advantage over tearing, since a cut zone and a torn zone are repopulated at the same density and speed."
Furthermore, tearing is more profitable for the fisherman, adding the weight of the stipe to that of the leaf. The problem of cutting versus tearing was evaded in 1971 when the professional seaweed fleet was mechanized. The 75 boats operating off the coasts of Finistère and the Côtes-du-Nord are equipped with hydraulic scoubidous.
We made a further effort to determine if either method had an effect on size at first catch. Samples examined showed that in both cases, plants were harvested at 70-80 cm or about 2 years of age, a point of low fertility.
5.3.2.2 Prohibited uses of certain tools
Each of the seaweed fisherman's tools is intended for a specific use. They can, however, be used in uncustomary ways which are prohibited.
The "guillotine": The guillotine is normally used to cut Laminaria. In 1855, the mayor of Lampaul-Ploudalmézeau, in response to some residents' protests, stated that "The use of long-handled sickles, from above, to cut shoreweed under water at high tide, is prohibited, in order to prevent degradation of the seaweed bed." Using the guillotine in this fashion allowed some harvesters, ignoring the regulation, to begin their harvest at high tide and well before the others. Their boats would be almost full at mid-tide when the other residents arrived on shore with their teams.
The rastell-aod or rastell-vor: The rastell-aod or rastell-vor is a tool commonly used to trap and collect floating seaweed. Although it is meant to be used from the beach, some fishermen in the Haut-Léon used it from their boats, preventing seaweed from drifting towards the harvesters waiting on shore.
As we have seen, trapping seaweed offshore is forbidden in some parts of the Pagan region. Use of the rastell-aod is forbidden where seaweed may be gathered only when it has reached dry land.
This tool is certainly advantageous for harvesting driftweed. In order to equalize harvesting capacity on Batz Island, the few men remaining are denied the use of the rastell-aod when fishermen are absent serving in the army and their wives are obliged to harvest the seaweed.
5.3.3 Prohibited practices
Specific and efficient action has been taken to avoid resource waste. In many communes, for instance, the practice of "bijin-diro" is forbidden. This practice consists of cutting as much seaweed as possible while the tide is out, relying on the incoming tide and a favourable wind to carry it to shore. If the wind drops or turns, the seaweed is scattered towards the open sea. Bottom weed sinks and is lost. The risk involved is great and prohibition of this practice well-founded.
5.4 Substratum maintenance and improvement
5.4.1 Extending the biotope
5.4.2 Protecting the biotope
5.4.3 Eliminating parasites
5.4.4 Prohibited zones
5.4.5 Other direct measures
5.4.1 Extending the biotope
At the end of the 19th century the municipality of Plouguerneau tried to extend the rocky portion of the coast by covering sanded areas with flat stones and blocks, thereby increasing the potential seaweed bed. This seems to be the only effort of this kind ever made in Brittany, although it is a common practice in Wales and Ireland.
Our field inquiry established that, although this effort has not been repeated elsewhere, seaweed fishermen are aware of the possibility of extending the seaweed bed, just as they observe that seaweed quickly covers the pilings to which they moor their boats.
5.4.2 Protecting the biotope
"Anyone fishing for crustaceans, abalone or other shellfish along the coastline of the commune is required to return to their original position any rocks displaced by their activity" (Plouguerneau, 1925).
This regulation is justified by two negative effects which the over-turning of rocks has upon the biotope:
- The top of the rock is covered by attached animals and vegetation. If the top of the rock is turned over into the bottom sediment, they are deprived of light and water circulation and hence of oxygen. The organisms die and then decay, still attached to the rock.
- Consequently, the smooth bottom of the rock, once exposed, is slow to acquire a new algal covering. A balanced (climax) population is achieved only after several stages of bacterial and diatomic interaction, often requiring several years (Huve, 1969).
Seaweed productivity is unavoidably affected by the displacement of the rocks. Municipal ordinances prohibiting rock displacement by seaweed harvesters and shellfish fishermen show that coastal populations recognize the need for such regulation.
5.4.3 Eliminating parasites
Laminaria harvesters have always tried to eliminate competitive species present in the seaweed bed. Although it is an annual, Saccorhezia bulbosa has always been the most troublesome of these because of its huge frond which blocks light penetration. One of the author's uncles likens elimination of this plant to underwater weeding.
5.4.4 Prohibited zones
There seems to be no record or memory of any specific case of reserved or prohibited zones. At Plonguerneau in 1890, a municipal ordinance sets dates for the seaweed harvest and reminds the population that harvesting is allowed in authorized areas only. Our research found no other mention of the existence of prohibited zones suggested by this ordinance.
It should, nonetheless, be mentioned that harvesting was prohibited on docks, jetties and in other port areas. This prohibition was intended to avoid damage to port facilities rather than for management purposes.
5.4.5 Other direct measures
The harvest of Zostera marina found on sandy shores is an important activity along the entire west coast of France. Competition arose between fishermen and seaweed harvesters in the Portsall region, where the fishermen's wives dug in the sand for Nephtys sp., which their husbands use as bait for pollock. Because their digging destroyed seaweed beds, seaweed fishermen in 1926 successfully obtained a regulation restricting the Nephtys hunters' access to the beds. This is an example of action taken to protect the seaweed industry.
<section>7</section>
6. RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
6.1 Use of drying areas
6.2 Maintenance of the shore
6.1 Use of drying areas
Before a product reaches sale, the ultimate step of resource development, it must be processed. In this case, the seaweed must be dried. Custom has provided a body of regulation concerning use of the dunes for drying purposes.
The dune is not only the accumulation of sand described by geomorphologists, but also all the land bordering the littoral. It may be either public or private property. The importance of this drying area to seaweed fishermen may be seen in the litigation involving the communes of Plougerneau and Guissény in a dispute over a stretch known as "la Sécherie" or "the drying place". Begun in 1788, this conflict was not resolved until 1886.
Privately owned drying land is reserved by the owner for his personal use, as in Saint-Pabu and Kerlouan, where private land is bordered by low stone walls. Use of public lands must be organized by local authorities.
In some cases, plots are rented through the mayor. At Porspoder, for example, the "tever-braz", or "great dune", is divided into parcels of a few ares *. Each is marked off by standing rocks, called "men-harz", and by cart paths. Other parts of the same commune which are privately owned must be rented to their owner.
* An "are" is equal to 100 sq. metres, or 119.6 sq. yards.
At Lampaul-Plouarzel in 1919, rents were set at 0.90 F per are per year, for a period of nine years. In the islands of the Molène Archipelago, seaweed fishermen must also rent a dune, and many are reluctant to use a horse to transport their seaweed because they would then have to rent additional space for grazing land. On Batz Island, the town hall allocates land in proportion to a family's size. At Landéda, where harvesters must compete for drying space with residents of Lannilis, outsiders may not rent but must own their own drying land.
"During no season of the year may the inhabitants of neighbouring communes spread their seaweed to dry on the coasts of this commune unless it is upon property of their own."
This municipal ordinance of 24 March 1845 also specifies that "All persons are expressly forbidden to allow their livestock to graze in the common fields of the commune until all dried seaweed has been collected."
The dune may be coveted by others and must be protected. At Porspoder in 1920, an ordinance reminds local inhabitants that "Removing piles of sand for sale in places where seaweed is dried is prohibited." Clumps of Armeria maritima, the grass covering the dune and known locally as "Taouarc'h" (lawn) was, in fact, cut and sold as fuel.
Common land at Plouescat is not rented, and cannot be reserved by "any person rich or poor. It will be attributed as needed to those who have seaweed to cover it" (Municipal Decree of 25 May, 1850). The same system existed at Cléder, where in 1807 a clause provided that a space at least eight steps wide be maintained between each drying area.
6.2 Maintenance of the shore
Efficient use of seaweed zones requires efficient management. After winter storms during the high tide period before Easter, seaweed harvesters devoted several work days to shore maintenance. Cart paths were cleared of debris, channels were dredged, pilings were replaced, moorings were rebuilt and rocks were cleared from driftweed areas. Paths along the cliffs were overhauled and the low walls where seaweed winches are positioned were checked and repaired, as were the storage areas where seaweed was disembarked. The boulders themselves were carved out to make better footholds for men carrying seaweed on their backs. The entire commune often participated in this work.
<section>8</section>
7. RESOURCE ACCESS AND ALLOCATION
7.1 Definition of access to the resource
7.2 Allocation regulation
7.3 Social compensation
7.4 Conclusions
Traditional measures regulating access to the resource are different from those regulating how it is shared. The first determine which categories of the population may have access to the resource, the second distribute it among the members of those categories.
7.1 Definition of access to the resource
7.1.1 Driftweed
7.1.2 Shoreweed
7.1.3 Bottomweed
Before Colbert's Ordinance of 1681, coastal dwellers were granted exclusive access to shoreweed, and official legislation has maintained this access to this day. Coastal communities have completed distribution by allocating sections of the shore to families and even individuals.
7.1.1 Driftweed
Although in theory driftweed belongs to everyone, coastal residents resent the arrival of farmers from the interior, well-equipped for the harvest with their heavy carts and strong horses. Many are tempted to reserve for themselves this driftweed which is often their only source of income, and in 1912 the seaweed harvesters of Lanildut decided that they alone had the right to harvest driftweed within their commune.
Another practice of the seaweed harvesters of Plounéour-Trez was to await the arrival of peasants from Goulven or Brignogan and then to sell them portions of the current harvest.
7.1.2 Shoreweed
Shoreweed are all those plants growing on the rocks which are exposed at low tide. They include many species, but only Fucaceae, Laminaria and Gigartina are exploited.
7.1.2.1 Seaweed belongs to the inhabitants of coastal communes
This rule is strictly enforced and no outsiders may participate in the harvest, even as the paid employees of a resident. Not even boats from other communes may be used. "Seaweed may be transported in boats from the commune only" read a municipal ordinance in Landéda in 1845. A similar restriction applied to horses in Roscoff.
These restrictions benefitted local fishermen who offered their harvesting services to local farmers in exchange for butter, meat, firewood and other farm products.
It was not until 1890, however, that the precise qualifications of a resident of the commune were established. Commune residents were:
- people living within the community,
- those residing there more than six months of the year,
- those owning more than 15 ares of farmland.
These regulations were abrogated shortly thereafter, in 1898, by municipal ordinances such as the one in Plouguerneau which stated that:
Anyone unable to prove his residence in the commune is denied the right to participate in the harvest, even if he owns land in Plouguerneau.
A similar step was taken in 1923 in the neighbouring commune of Guissény:
No one residing in another commune may participate in the seaweed harvest in the commune of Guissény, no matter what the area of the land he farms in the commune of Guissény might be.
The communes might, however, come to an agreement among themselves. By virtue of historic rights acquired when Lannilis and Landéda formed the single parish of Ploudiner, the residents of Lannilis retain the right to harvest shoreweed on the coast of Landéda, though at a later date. They may have access to the shore only after several days of harvesting by local residents. Regulations in 1954 established cutting dates as follows:
Landéda: from 6 May to 30 June
Lannilis: from 16 May to 30 June.
Similarly, no one questioned the traditional right of the inhabitants of Larret to continue to cut black seaweed along the littoral of Porspoder after they became separate communes in 1970.
A social measure which will be spoken of later allowed the widows of men killed in the service of their country to hire harvesters from outside the commune.
7.1.2.2 The definition of a coastal dweller may be qualified
Residents of some communes may harvest seaweed off the coast of their own neighbourhood only. This is the case in Roscoff, where municipal laws establish methods for resource allocation.
Excessive fractioning of resource allocation may adversely affect families and even individuals. These diverse forms of resource allocation will be discussed on page 28.
7.1.2.3 Should seaweed belong exclusively to the commune?
Allocating shore seaweed to coastal dwellers alone creates a marketing problem. This seaweed becomes an "attached" property. It cannot be used or sold outside the commune.
Although well-known for his analysis of and commentary on Colbert's Ordinance, Valin (1760) offered no explanation for this ban on sales outside the commune. Seaweed would surely have proved useful to farmers outside coastal parishes. In North Finistère, for example, where more than half of the communes are agricultural, fertilizer is scarce.
Resolution of this problem began with the decree of 4 July, 1853, allowing mayors of coastal communes to permit surplus seaweed to be sold outside the commune when they judged it necessary. Landowners who were not residents of the commune were permitted to remove from the commune only that portion of seaweed intended for their own use.
A decree of 8 February, 1868, ended all discrimination. This free circulation was legally perpetuated thereafter, although it was not always immediately accepted at the local level.
One example of local resistance is the continued ban on external sales during the first eight days of the harvest, until all local land has been supplied with fertilizer. In other cases, especially in Haut-Léon, the prohibition of exports was related to competition between seaweed for agricultural use and seaweed for industry. On Batz Island, until 1930, for instance, no seaweed was burned. The entire yield was reserved for agricultural use.
7.1.3 Bottomweed
In the Pagan region, shore plots are allocated to all families residing in the commune. The tenants of each plot hold the exclusive right to harvest any shoreweed, Laminaria and lichen found there.
Industrial exploitation of Laminaria is well-established, the first industrially organized iodine factory having opened at Conquet in 1828. Except for periods of very low tide (of a coefficient superior to 100), when the upper level of the seaweed bed is exposed, Laminaria must be harvested by boat. For this reason, official legislation, which requires that all fishermen be registered sailors, requires that all seaweed harvesters be registered as well. All seaweed found on islands, islets and in areas inaccessible by foot is also allotted to registered seaweed harvesters.
No further allocation is made among fishermen in these zones. While habit and preference determine the work area of each professional, few of them resent the presence of seaweed harvesters from other communes. In this instance, belonging to a profession is more important than being a member of the community.
7.2 Allocation regulation
7.2.1 Driftweed
7.2.2 Shore seaweed
7.2.3 Bottomweed
The preceding section dealt with the principles determining regulation of access and allocation. The following outlines the practical side of these measures or how resource allocation is actually accomplished.
7.2.1 Driftweed
Regulation states that driftweed harvesting is open to everyone in all locations (res nullius). This theoretical freedom has been modified by custom. Driftweed is, in fact, available to harvesters in one of two forms:
- it is still adrift, or
- it has been cast upon the shore.
A description of the prevailing customs in the commune of Porspoder will illustrate these two cases. We will then discuss variations in different zones.
7.2.1.1 The example of Porspoder
a) Seaweed still adrift. This seaweed cannot be allocated. Access is open and the first person to bring it to dry land becomes the owner (principle of first occupancy). The avidity of seaweed harvesters is well-known and the temptation to appropriate seaweed collected by others is great.
The harvesters' work must therefore be organized and rules enforced at the local level. When the tide goes out, the harvester follows its movement, forming rows of piles to be built up as he proceeds. The first pile in line is marked by some distinctive identifying object, such as a whip, jacket, sack or stone. Anyone who sets out his piles in a disorderly fashion is reprimanded by his neighbours who suspect that he might be doing so in order to steal some of their piles.
The piles are usually begun outside the backwash area, but this involves too wide an area on a flat shore and the harvester would rather risk the tide and form his piles as he works. He anchors the pile between his feet, or bends over it as he works to prevent the current from carrying it off. Should the sea carry the pile away, despite his precautions, anyone may catch and claim it.
b) Driftweed cast upon shore. Seaweed cast upon the shore is shared, but the form of allocation may vary, depending upon:
- the number of persons involved in the harvest;
- the amount of seaweed on shore;
- the location.
There are three forms of allocation:
(i) "Frip" - Under this system, allocation takes place before the harvest begins. Adjustment is usually made, however, to control the avidity of some of those present.
(ii) "Touch-lod" is the name given to the system by which attribution occurs before the harvest but also prorata to the persons present. This system ensures a more egalitarian attribution.
(iii) "Boutin" - This name applies to a pro-rata sharing among all participants after a collective harvest.
These three forms of sharing vary in the following ways:
- The more people present, the more "Touch-lod" is called for.
- If there are very large quantities of seaweed, sharing becomes unnecessary. Each person will be able to gather enough to meet his needs.
- A method of sharing is sometimes imposed by the location of the harvest. On certain shores (Pors-an-toulou, Enez Meloun), tradition dictates that "Touch-lod" be practised, while on others (Aochou Meloun, Mazou), it has never been used.
Description of the different methods:
(i) "Frip": The harvest may not begin until sunrise, which is marked when the Four lighthouse is extinguished. While the light is still shining, harvesters visit the shore, choosing the best sites. The earliest arrivals are therefore favoured. Once a spot is chosen, the harvester marks it with his tool, the "croc" (a short of hook), gathering a little seaweed around it. It is possible to retain several spots but it will later be seen that this is generally useless.
It is forbidden to begin work as long as the light is shining. As soon as it stops, work begins, and each harvester must mark as his the place he has reserved. Ownership is not truly established until the harvester has marked off the area around himself, removing seaweed from the sand (Figure 5). This demarcation of the work area is usually arranged perpendicular to the shore front, but this is not obligatory. Only one place per person may be marked with a "croc". To increase their harvest, then, each member of each family must come to the shore with a croc, or the head of the family may mark a place for each child. Once the seaweed is marked off and provisionally collected, women and children leave. Only the men remain to collect and cart off the seaweed which has been gathered up. This custom favours the fastest workers and especially those who arrive very early on shore.
Figure 5 - The "frip" method. 1/. Waiting for the light to be extinguished.
Figure 5 - The "frip" method. 2/. Marking off plots.
Figure 5 - The "frip" method. 3/. Loading the harvest.
(ii) "Touch-lod": This is a more egalitarian custom; involving real sharing. Places are drawn at random. As soon as the lighthouse light goes out, those wishing to participate in the harvest are counted. There will be as many shares as people present, children and infants included. Families are present in their largest possible number to take advantage of this distribution. The quantity of seaweed found on shore is evaluated by number of cartloads. This traditional method is surprisingly accurate.
To facilitate this expose, we will simulate a situation: Ten families totalling 48 persons are present on shore. The oldest, or those of acknowledged moral or intellectual authority, have evaluated the quantity of seaweed at 64 cartloads.
Step 1: There are 64 cartloads for 48 persons.
Family
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Number of Family Members
Step 2: These are divided into two equal groups.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
An imaginary line is drawn to divide the shore into two equal parts. At this point there are 2 x 32 cartloads for 24 persons each. By drawing straws ("kenna plouz"), it is decided which group will take the right side and which will take the left.
Step 3: One more division is made to form four teams of 12 persons. Twelve cartloads are allotted to each team. The position of each team is also determined by drawing straws:
A
A
C
B
H
G
E
J
I
F
Step 4: Each group divides its space in proportion to the number of persons present. The quantity of seaweed in each person's plot is evaluated and arrangements are made to eliminate inequity by re-distribution later. If re-distribution is not feasible, after the harvest a new line or cross is made in the sand with the handle of a tool. The shore divided, work may begin. At this point, all those not involved in transporting the seaweed leave. School-age children go to school. The ebb tide sometimes deposits large quantities of additional seaweed. This is declared either free to all ("frip") or to be shared ("touch-lod").
(iii) "Boutin": Sometimes, when the seaweed is scattered among the rocks, it is difficult to estimate quantity. In such a situation, those persons concerned, who are usually of limited means, harvest the seaweed collectively, carrying the bundles away to the dune on their backs. When harvesting is completed, these bundles are counted and shared equally by all those who worked. Less common than the two preceding methods, boutin is usually practised on shores accessible only by foot, by people who are not farmers or seamen and have neither horses nor boats.
(iv) Conclusion: The following graph illustrates the use of "frip" and "touch-lod":
Figure 6. Conditions for the practice of the two methods.
"Frip" is the method used where seaweed is present in dense quantities and harvesters are few. When the number of harvesters increases, "touch-lod" must be practised. When there are few harvesters and little seaweed, however, "frip" is satisfactory.
- The two methods are occasionally practised together. "Touch-lod" is used first for the preliminary divisions. Harvesters inside each of the areas established may then decide whether or not their seaweed is "frip".
- As previously mentioned, location may determine the method used. "Touch-lod" has always been practised on certain shores.
- It should be added that our informants noted a tendency to abandon "touch-lod" in favour of "frip", due perhaps to a progressive disorganization of social structures and discipline. As the demand for seaweed for fertilizer decreases, and the price drops, harvesters prefer the greater flexibility of the "frip" method.
7.2.1.2 Geographic variability of custom
Driftweed harvesting has been permitted, in all areas and at all times, even at night, since Colbert's ordinance in 1681. This freedom, summarized by the words
E lec'h ma zeuz tre ha lano
Peb hini lak e hano*
has not always been strictly preserved.
* "Where there are ebb and flow, anyone may write his name".
a) Individual reserves. (1) No allocation problem arises in the case of seaweed which has drifted onto uninhabited islands and islets. It can only belong to registered sailors able to harvest it from their boats. (2) In the case of driftweed not yet on shore, there is rarely any allocation made. The widely accepted custom is that this seaweed becomes the property of the first person able to gather it. It must first, of course, be completely removed from the water and amassed out of reach of the current. Should the tide carry it seaward it again becomes available to all.
Some seaweed professionals lay claim to floating seaweed. To do so they make small piles of seaweed, protruding from the water and lodged on rocks which form a polygon. The area thus marked off represents their property. This practice has been observed in Landéda only. More frequent is the practice of dredging driftweed beneath the surface ("silla bijin"), or collecting it before it reaches the shore. Municipalities have taken steps to curb such practices, which are unfair to those harvesters waiting on shore:
When registered seamen harvest driftweed by boat, they should be prohibited from using any methods or manoeuvres which prevent the seaweed from drifting to shore, and should be fined for violations of this prohibition (Landunvez, 1904).
It is furthermore forbidden to gather floating seaweed with iron rakes (Roscoff, 1845).
Another practice to be noted, common in several places and in the islands of the Molène Archipelago, consists of erecting rock dams to trap seaweed during the ebb tide. This is an obvious example of appropriation of the resource by intervention before it becomes accessible to everyone.
b) The "frip" principle of seaweed sharing. This method is common all along the coast. The harvester must simply place his tools on the area he has retained, sometimes before the light is extinguished, sometimes after (Lanildut, Plouescat). In every locale, each person may place only one tool. The only real differences are in the methods used to mark off each section. In the region between le Conquet and Ploudalmézeau, harvesters try to mark their area as quickly as possible by making a sort of furrow in the seaweed, while beyond this region, towards Roscoff, harvesters proceed from a central point and progressively enlarge their section by forming small piles (Figure 7).
Figure 7. Progressive enlargement of the harvesting area
When each person's section is established, allocation is complete. Only the problem of transportation remains. Here, as in some aspects of the harvest mentioned previously, local regulation must restrain greed.
It must be recalled that it is expressly forbidden to place too many tools, or to position harnessed teams, on the seaweed (Le Conquet 1950).
This system of sharing favours those who work quickly, and sometimes leads, in the resulting confusion of activity, to disputes over bundles of seaweed. Quarrels are frequent but even though a single stipe need often be cut in half to satisfy both parties claiming to own it, these shore disputes or "fachuri an aod" are quickly forgotten.
c) Seaweed sharing by random drawing for plots. The name given this practice varies from region to region (Figure 8) and its form may also vary.
Figure 8. Local names of the system
(i) This practice seems to have disappeared from the region south of Aber Ildut after the war. Our informants state that it was replaced by frip exclusively.
(ii) To the north, at Porspoder, our informants remember that after 1930 touch-lod was progressively replaced by frip.
(iii) Further north, if we can rely on the recollections of our informants, drawing for plots was the usual practice.
(iv) In other communes, it seems that there were some "frip" and some "touch-lod" zones. This is the case for Porspoder, Tréompan-Ploudalmézeau, Landéda, and Plouguerneau.
(v) Eligibility for lot allocation may vary:
- Porspoder: Everyone present on shore is eligible, regardless of age or gender.
- Landunvez: All family members are eligible, including children, who need not be present.
- Lampaul-Ploudalmézeau: All persons present over 10 years of age are eligible.
- Landéda and Plouguerneau: Same conditions as at Porspoder.
- Brignogan: As above.
- Plounéour: Only men are entitled to a plot. On Mondays, eligibility is extended to children over 10. Women are eligible only when widowed or when their husbands are absent on military service.
(vi) Not all harvest areas are allotted by dividing the shore into two parts. In Plounéour-Trez and throughout the Haut-Léon, those in charge practise another system. Once the light is extinguished, a preliminary division is made, called "An trouc'h braz" or "the big cut", creating two zones where harvesters may work as they please.
Within these two zones two, three or four more divisions are made. Each person may choose one, but may not leave it once he enters. There is a slightly different system on Batz Island, called "tenna chetou" ("drawing for lots"), consisting of drawing for lots in the two zones. Each family places a small object - a stone, a shell, etc. - in a hat, and beach plots are assigned by drawing these objects from the hat.
(vii) Lot assignment usually begins when the lighthouse light is extinguished. In the Pagan region, however, and especially at Brignogan and Plounéour, distribution occurs at mid-ebb tide. The advantage of this system is that it standardizes the conditions of resource allocation and that allocation occurs at a time when driftweed is totally accessible.
d) Allocation following a collective harvest. This practice, observed in Porspoder, has also been used in the Pagan region and in Ouessant (Thoer, 1909). Collective harvesting was adopted to meet community needs in Ouessant, whose men are absent at sea for long periods of time. Agricultural work, as well as seaweed harvesting, is accomplished collectively, at both the neighbourhood and village levels.
7.2.2 Shore seaweed
Methods of allocation of shore seaweed correspond to three geographic zones (Figure 9).
- The first zone, of which the Pagan region is the centre, is characterized by a complex system for allocation of the shore and its plant resources.
- The second zone is located to the west of the first and includes the estuary area, where systems are more simple.
- The third and last is a double zone, which extends from the eastern (Haut-Léon) boundaries to the southern (littoral of the canon of Saint-Renan) boundaries of the first two zones.
Figure 9. Method of shoreweed attribution
7.2.2.1 The example of the Pagan region
The Pagan region, although difficult to define, theoretically regroups the communes of Plouguerneau, Guissény, Kerlouan, Brignogan and Plounéour. The practice of allocating a portion of the shore to each family in proportion to its size is found in the last three communes only. Allocation is valid for four years and is the equivalent of a permit. The family has exclusive right to all plant species found in its portion within tidal limits. Small islands which are found within the family's portion but which are not accessible by foot during spring tides are excluded. Seaweed from these islands is never shared, but is considered bottom weed and is therefore reserved to registered seamen.
We will describe here the practices current in Plounéour-Trez, the commune for which the most precise data were available.
Every four years (1901, 1905, 1909, etc.) in early January, a list of all the families and individuals composing the local population is compiled. When the list is established, the inhabitants are called to the town hall, one neighbourhood at a time, to make their declarations. On 4 January, 1901, for example, residents were invited to present their claims in the following order:
7:00 - 9:00 - Bourg
9:00 - 12:00 - Kerurus
12:00 - 15:00 - Douar ar Pont
15:00 - 17:00 - Trévigny
Each family member is entitled to one plot. The head of the family declares the number to which his family is entitled and indicates where his family's plot should be distributed over the rocks. If, for example, there were 13 family members, the head of the family could claim his 13 shares, six on one rock, four on another, three on a third.
At the end of the day, the town secretary should have a total number of plots equal to the total population. If not, an inquiry is made to determine who has cheated or who has not claimed his share. Anyone who cheats forfeits his seaweed rights and his lots are divided among the other harvesters.
Residents who do not wish to harvest the seaweed due to them may sell it, but only to other residents of the commune. This transaction must be made public and the declaration of sale, specifying the sum paid and the number of lots involved, must be approved at the town hall.
Persons who leave the commune when farm leases expire may sell their shore plots to whomever replaces them, even if the new tenant did not previously reside in the commune.
Once all transactions are made, each rock or group of rocks represents a certain number of shares. For example, eight families possessing 50 shares propose to exploit a given group of rocks. On a day of their choosing, they go to the rocks to decide how they should be divided. They begin by establishing the "trouc'h koz", or the median line separating the zone into two equal stocks. Each half is then divided into 25 parts. When necessary, these parts are further subdivided to equal the number of shares required.
When the distribution is complete, the boundaries of each zone are identified ("ar merkou") and no further changes may be made for the next four years. Each family may exploit its plot as it chooses, annually or bi-annually.
This system permits a fair distribution of the resource. It is well organized and managed by the municipal authority.
7.2.2.2 Sharing the shore in the Abers region
Here, lot allocation is accomplished differently. Allocation is not renewable. Each family holds specific shore lots. If a family member dies or a family moves away, those shares become available and must be negotiated for with neighbours. In Porspoder most harvesters are full-time farmers who frequently move to new farmland. When they leave their land they also leave their shore rights and the new occupant assumes both.
When the black seaweed harvest begins, people go to their respective places, which are completely cleared in three to four days. Only after this time may harvesters leave their places, and shore sections left unexploited become the property of the first to occupy them. When the shore is cleared, farmers usually return to their fields. Only professional seaweed harvesters go with their boats to continue the harvest on the small islands not accessible at low tide.
There are many small islands in the waters off the Wrac'h and Benoit Estuaries. Because inhabitants of these islands own and have duly registered deeds to their land, they claim the exclusive right to harvest seaweed found there. In practice, however, they would reserve this seaweed until all seaweed on other shores adjacent to the mainland had been cut. Protest from seaweed professionals put an end to this unfair practice in 1920.
7.2.3 Bottomweed
There is really no allocation of this resource. Free movement and exploitation are the rule, as we have seen. It is interesting, however, to note measures taken by the seaweed harvesting profession since 1978. Aware of the tremendous harvesting potential of the newly modernized fleet, the professionals decided to limit its number to 75 fishing units, in order to better distribute to each the quotas set by scientists and industry. This represents a form of resource allocation and regulation of resource sharing. Seventy-five units are sufficient to exploit the Laminaria beds of North Brittany.
7.3 Social compensation
7.3.1 Days for the needy
7.3.2 Special privileges extended to widows
7.3.3 Regulating competition
7.3.4 Safety measures
7.3.5 Intervention by the Church *
Just resource distribution is accomplished by controlling competition and also by direct aid to people in disadvantaged social categories. The needy require assistance and provision must be made for job safety and help in case of accident. In considering these social measures, we must recognize the important role played by the Church and the influence of the Church on the behaviour of seaweed harvesters.
7.3.1 Days for the needy
This system, by designating certain days as "Indigents" or "Poor Days", provides for the temporary allocation of the resource to the neediest social groups, whose harvesting potential is limited. Technically, they have access to only baskets, litters and wheelbarrows. When the dates of the harvest are set, it is understood that the needy will begin one, two or three days earlier:
Plouescat: 1 day
Cléder: 2 days
Roscoff: 3 days
This practice has survived until today in the region between Plouescat and Roscoff, although its area of application, which in 1853 included Guissény, has decreased over the years.
Indirect reference to the past existence of Days for the Poor may be found in municipal ordinances of the communes of Plouguerneau (1824), and Landéda (1845):
In order to avoid quarrels and waste, the seaweed cutting period will be the same for all residents of the commune; special privileges will be extended to no one. (Landéda, 1845)
The seaweed harvesting period will be the same for all inhabitants, to avoid disputes and waste which resulted in the past when special permission was given to widows and mothers of large families to begin the harvest three tides before others who have the use of horses and wagons. (Plouguerneau, 1824)
Even as early as 1812, the Prefect of Finistère published an ordinance predicting such a measure. There was therefore a progressive reduction of the area in which such privileges were extended to the underprivileged. This seems to have been a voluntary change rather than a gradual erosion of custom. The custom did survive in Haut-Léon, where it was known by several different names: (Figure 10)
Mare ar peurienn, or Tide of the Poor
Mare ar dougerienn, or Porter's Tide
Deiz ar peorienn, or Day of the Poor
Dervez ar Man, or Basket Day.
Figure 10. Geographic extension of the principle of a day for the poor
A list of all those persons considered needy is established by the town hall and is revised periodically. Figure 11 illustrates the distribution of the poor in the commune of Plouescat in 1915.
Figure 11. Distribution of the poor in the commune of Plouescat in 1915
Excluded from the list are all those who own wagons and horses, boats or "parterres", small flat boats 2 or 3 metres long which serve as tenders for larger, sloop-type vessels. Because their harvesting potential is evidently much greater than that of those listed as "indigent" it was important to manage resource access to enable the disfavoured to meet their needs.
7.3.2 Special privileges extended to widows
In Haut-Léon, the black seaweed harvest is far more important than in Bas-Léon. The produce industry requires large quantities of fertilizer and it is vital to make use of all hands on days when harvesting is permitted. Widows, or wives of men in the military, had the right to obtain help outside the commune. This right constitutes an amendment of the principle of exclusive access for coastal commune residents.
This practice has been observed in many areas and at Lampaul-Ploudalmézeau and Landéda in particular. In Landéda, outside help for women was authorized by a mayoral ordinance in 1845:
We authorize each woman whose husband is in the military to employ one worker from outside the commune.
7.3.3 Regulating competition
The various methods of allocation promote a just distribution of seaweed resources, proportionate to need. In cases where these measures are not adequate, steps must be taken to limit abusive practices and unfair competition.
Black seaweed can be cut only at low tide. Harvesters must work very quickly and workers specialize to increase yields. Some are cutters, others transporters or wagoneers. The first cut the seaweed, the second carry it to the cart paths and there form piles which the third group, with carts and horses, will transfer to the dune. Because one member of each family (or two, if the family has two teams) is involved in carting and not directly in cutting, yield is unavoidably lessened. A great effort is made, therefore, to minimize time spent on transportation while the tide is out.
7.3.3.1 "Gwir-torchad"
Gwir-torchad is partial transportation of the seaweed. The carts are unloaded at a higher point on shore, out of reach of the returning tide, but below the dune. The gain in time is appreciable, enabling each carter to spend a few minutes cutting between trips. The seaweed has a little time to dry, becoming lighter and easier to transport.
If everyone were to practice "gwir-torchad", entrance to the shore would be blocked. To prevent this, custom, and most communes, require that seaweed be deposited "war an dihorenn", or away from the shore area, before the lighthouses are relit at the end of the day. In Porspoder, any seaweed left on shore overnight became driftweed, accessible to anyone.
Among the exceptions cited are these:
When a seaweed harvester intends to sell a few cartloads of black seaweed to a farmer, he does not want to take up drying space on his portion of the dune, and is allowed to leave that seaweed "gourlenn", or, at sea level.
It is also obvious that the bundles of seaweed lashed together to form a "drome" so bulky that only a part is visible above the water cannot immediately be removed from the area. After the last hour of low tide, and allowing time to convoy them, these "dromes" do not reach dry land before 8 or 9 p.m. For this reason, seaweed harvesters may transport the dromes the next day or, if they choose to work into the night, they are granted special permission to work after sundown, even though the lighthouse has been relit.
In Haut-Léon, special permission is given to harvesters on "Indigents' Days" to place the seaweed, which they must carry on their backs, quite nearby on shore, but out of the water's reach.
7.3.3.2 "Dour-veina"
This technique differs from the former. Rather than being partially accomplished, transportation is deferred until no more cutting can be done. Under this system, all energies can be devoted to harvesting during the authorized cutting period.
In 1844, the mayor Landunvez described the practice briefly in an ordinance Intended to forbid it:
The council, considering
that certain individuals have developed the undesirable habit of sinking seaweed on the spot as it is cut, so as to accumulate more seaweed during the time meant for its transport,
that this operation, called dour-vena, inhibits seaweed reproduction because the rocks used to anchor the seaweed disturb the sea bottom,
and that seaweed detached from the bottom and tossed onshore by the current becomes common property,
the council requests that his Honour the Mayor forbid residents to anchor cut seaweed in this way because of the excessive damage it causes.
The practice consists of cutting the seaweed, stacking it in a nook in the rocks and anchoring it in place with heavy stones. The next day, at the next tide, the stones are removed, more seaweed is added to the pile and the stones are replaced as the tide turns. The harvest of two or three days may be stored in this fashion. If stored any longer, deprived in this way of the light and air needed to carry out the physiological functions of respiration and photosynthesis, it would deteriorate. Once the shore is cleared and cutting has ceased, harvesters who have risked using this practice can transport their seaweed to the dune at their leisure.
The general tendency is to prohibit the practice of dour-veina (Figure 12). In Landéda, however, a municipal text of 1864 permits sinking harvested seaweed in certain urgent situations: if, for example, one of the ropes binding the pile were caught among the rocks, the immobilized pile could be sunk until the next day.
Figure 12. Extension of the ban on sinking seaweed Practice of Dour-Veina
7.3.3.3 Coordinating harvest seasons
Some islets are accessible by foot only at mid-tide or later. They can be reached by boat at the beginning of ebb tide. It has always been the custom that cutting begins only when harvesters are able to reach the islets by foot. Harvesters with boats are therefore forbidden to begin earlier. This custom prevails for the rock known as Golhedoc, near Guissény, and many at Plouescat.
7.3.4 Safety measures
Effective organization and some form of police presence are necessary to prevent accidents during the general upheaval which accompanies the black seaweed harvest season.
At Guissény in 1833, the succession of carts crossing the village was required to follow a circular course: those going to the shore passing by way of the "Pen c'hroas", those leaving the shore taking the main thoroughfare. In Cléder, boats and dromes must be placed at least 2 metres away from the cart paths, while in Roscoff they can be stationed in specific areas only. Local regulations often impose further restrictions to ensure public safety.
In 1904, after prohibiting all seaweed harvesting between 1 November and 14 April, the mayor of Landunvez stated:
This restriction on harvesting during bad weather will preserve the lives of many of our sailors, who would otherwise imprudently risk illness and accident.
A similar concern was expressed in Plouescat in 1850:
In respect for the lives of seaweed harvesters, who would be exposed to great danger in any other season, we must restrict the seaweed cutting season to the month of May.
A complementary measure appeared in 1862, stating that the mayor reserved the right, in the event of a storm or inclement weather, to alter the opening dates to protect the public.
Another example of concern for public safety is found in 1852 at Lampaul-Ploudalmézeau where the mayor limited participation in driftweed harvesting to children over the age of nine, on the grounds that "Parents allow even very young children to take part in the harvest despite intemperate weather which is often damaging to their health".
In 1845 the mayor of Landéda prohibited the gathering of seaweed by swimmers. This measure, by keeping people away from the shore at night, was also a safety measure.
There are many such examples of official concern for public safety during the harvest.
There was a general ban on night-time harvesting. Although successive modifications sometimes permitted limited harvesting of driftweed at night, the general restriction on harvesting shoreweed at night remained in force.
The lighthouse is the undisputed arbiter of night and day. Morning begins when the light is extinguished, night when it is relit. Before the existence of lighthouses, a ranger or seaweed warden officially signalled night and day, sometimes accompanied by a drumroll, as in Porspoder. For many years, however, the coast has been dotted with so many lights that there is no point from which a light is not visible. Only in heavy fog can a harvester now be in doubt about the official beginning or closing of a harvest day (Figure 13).
Figure 13. Distribution of the principal lighthouses on the costs of the Léon and the date they went into service
7.3.5 Intervention by the Church *
* The author wishes to acknowledge the invaluable collaboration of Mr. J.L. Le Floc'h in the preparation of this section.
As previously mentioned on page 14, the opening dates and duration of the seaweed cutting season were established by parish administrators until the Revolution. Civil authorities did not then assume total responsibility. The continuing influence of the church is seen in the fact that harvesting on Sundays and holidays was still prohibited. In the Léon, a heavily Catholic region, this ban includes religious holidays and some holidays of civil origin. On Sundays and Feasts of Obligation (Christmas, Ascension, 15 August and All Saints' Day) when the church requires attendance at mass, all work, including seaweed harvesting, is forbidden.
Seven other feasts or holy days are celebrated by a high mass at which attendance is not required. These are New Year's Day (The Circumcision), 2 February (The Purification), 25 March (The Annunciation), 24 June (Saint John the Baptist's Day), 8 September (Nativity of the Virgin), 8 December (Conception of the Virgin), and 26 December (Saint Stephen's Day). On these days the harvest may not begin until noon.
The list of half-day holidays was increased by tradition, or local clergy, to include Candlemass (2 February), Shrove Tuesday, Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, Monday and Tuesday of Easter Week, Monday and Tuesday of Pentecost, the Feast of the Sacred Heart, and All Souls' Day. Harvesting is prohibited until noon on all these days, except Monday and Tuesday of Easter and Pentecost, when it is prohibited all day. Armistice Day, 11 November, is also commemorated by a mass and considered a half-holiday.
More half days were observed before 1801, when many were eliminated by the Concordat agreed upon by Napoleon I and Pius VII. Napoleon evidently preferred that the people work rather than attend mass. Our field research indicates that local custom may cause great variation in the observance of these holidays. Data for Figure 14, correlating religious holidays and harvesting bans, was provided by further research and interviews with the older residents of each commune.
Figure 14. Religious holidays and harvesting bans
The purpose of the half-day ban on harvesting appears two-fold:
- to encourage attendance at mass, and
- to avoid giving an unfair advantage to those harvesters who do not attend mass.
Moreover, the "fabrique", a civil body responsible for administering parish finances, derived a portion of its income from certain rocks reserved for its use. In 1845, for example, the "Roc'h Melen'Vraz" rocks were reserved for the fabrique of Santec to subsidize church maintenance.
7.4 Conclusions
Until World War II, seaweed was a major source of income for the people living along the coast of the Léon. Such an important resource required effective management. Although seaweed harvesters were thought to be concerned with stock conservation, most management measures dealt with organizing seaweed exploitation.
Two systems for the allocation of driftweed, "frip" and "touch-lod", evolved in coastal areas. Originally reserved for coastal communes, the harvest zones were subsequently redivided and fractioned by coastal populations until each individual was allotted a portion of the shore.
Although tradition has not carried the same weight in each zone studied, it can be stated that
- in areas of intense seaweed exploitation, traditional methods have been preserved;
- where there is little seaweed harvesting activity, many traditional methods were abandoned in favour of simpler and more flexible methods.
Variability may be geographic or historical.
We may conclude that past intensification of exploitation led to the creation of traditional management methods. For example, regulation of exploitation brought about a shift from collective benefit from the resource to individual benefit. This idea that intensification led to management is reinforced by the recent limiting of the seaweed fleet to 75 units. The licensing system allows a limited number of boats exclusive benefits from, and therefore the appropriation of, a marine resource.
<section>9</section>
8. OTHER ASPECTS OF TRADITIONAL MANAGEMENT OF SEAWEED HARVESTING IN THE LEON
We have seen that there are many measures Intended to promote efficient exploitation of marine plant resources. Our informants concur that during the first half of this century these measures were generally respected. Even stronger than tradition, social pressures - fear of punishment and of the clergy - are powerful motivation for respect of the regulations.
As in all human society, however, there are people so intent on profit that they are willing to break the law. For this reason, each coastal population has a local police force, or shore patrol. The name given these men varies by location:
Le Conquet: shore watchman
Landunvez: watchman
Plouguerneau: coast guard
Porspoder: shore guard
Plouescat: harvest guard
These men are chosen for specific qualities. The Registry of the Commune of Plouguerneau states that all nominees must have an unblemished police record, be of above average mental and physical aptitude, and upstanding members of the community.
There are usually several guards in each commune:
Lampaul-Plouarzel: 7 guards
Landunvez: 9 guards
Landéda: 5 guards
Tréflez: 1 guards
Plouescat: 5 guards
Roscoff: 6 guards
Each guard is responsible for a portion of the coast assigned by the mayor and corresponding to the larger divisions of the commune. At Plouguerneau, once composed of five shores, there were five guards.
Their functions were described in this manner:
These coast guards will closely oversee seaweed conservation in their sections and in all sections of the commune that they are allowed or requested to check as they find necessary.
In Haut-Léon, the guardian's job is most exacting on "Deiz-ar-peorrenn" (Indigents' Day), when they must be particularly vigilant and cannot themselves participate in the harvest.
They usually receive a set sum from the commune and a portion of the fines they levy as wages. Often, half of each fine is given to the guard and the other half to a charitable organization such as the welfare bureau, the local hospice or schools (both secular and religious). In some places, as in Kerlouan, the violater is obliged to perform four days of community service work rather than pay a fine (repairing highways, for example).
Action to be taken in the event of a very serious infraction is determined by the village rector, the mayor, or the police.
In conclusion, it may be said that a true respect of local traditions of exploitation exists. Occasional quarrels among harvesters are of little importance and memory of these "fachuri an aod" or "harvest disputes" fades quickly. A local authority, first organized by the clergy and now maintained by civil powers, resolves minor problems. In the case of litigation between communes, a commission is usually appointed by the Maritime Prefect.
<section>a</section>
9. CONCLUSION
Men have exploited marine plant stocks for centuries. At the end of the 19th century and in the early 20th century, seaweed harvesting activity was intense. Although cutting takes place along the entire littoral, stocks have always seemed well able to reproduce themselves.
Is this proof of rational resource management? Harvesters have acknowledged the need for resource management and the choice of cutting periods reflects their awareness of resource maturity and of technical imperatives (drying time, coordination of the harvest with the plowing season, etc.).
Rotation is practised in some areas. Gear and methods considered harmful to the resource are often prohibited by local regulations and traditions. A genuine commitment to resource exploitation management has been made.
This effort has been directed toward the social rather than the biological aspects of management. Exploitation is highly organized, demonstrating that control of effort as well as control of competition exists. The regulations include compensation for social inequities, such as widow's rights and "Veiz ar peorienn".
In this maritime region, where the principle that "the sea belongs to all" is usually the rule, resource attribution lends a unique character to seaweed exploitation.
Allocation may take place at the communal, neighbourhood or family level. There is a trend towards individual benefit and away from community use of the resource. This shift, linked to intensification of exploitation, represents, in fact, the only means of achieving equitable resource distribution in this situation.
We reach the conclusion that seaweed harvesters perceived two distinct areas of resource management, both equally important. These were the rational exploitation of the stock and the organization of community participation in this exploitation.
Achieving these ends required a true sense of community loyalty and even commonality of thought and way of life. Fishery studies too often neglect the social behaviour of fishermen. For many, rational management of fishery stocks involves no level beyond that of population dynamics. Man's intervention in this approach is seen only as a coefficient of fishing mortality.
An inventory of equipment and resources, management objectives and programme definitions are all vital to fishery management, but should retain a human face. Like history and works of art, tradition contributes to the patrimony of a people. It should be respected and adapted to meet the changing needs of resource management.
It would be futile to try to make modern tuna seiners of the Jingadeiros of Brazil or the canoe fishermen of Senegal. We have seen that Breton seaweed harvesters, though eager to modernize their industry, refused underwater harvesting by divers and the gigantic "floating harvesters" conceived for harvesting Macrocystis; measures which they could not integrate with their way of life.
All management should be conducted for and with the people involved, with respect for and willingness to learn from the traditions which have sustained them.
<section>b</section>
10. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arzel, P., 1980 Les goémoniers du Léon. Etude sur l'évolution des méthodes de récolte des algues. Thèse de 3ème cycle en ethnolgie de la France, Brest, 443 p. (ms)
Arzel, P., 1982 Evolution récente du métier de goémonier. Penn ar Bed, 13 (108-9):36-42
Ayrault, L., 1879 Etude sur législation réglementant la coupe et la récolte des herbes marines. Rev. Marit. Colon., Paris, 63:5-15, 401-34, 598-639
Bichard-Breau, D., 1964 Affinités géographiques et caractères écologiques de quelques algues communes sur les côtes bretonnes. Penn ar Bed, 4(37):201-9
Cambry, J., 1836 Voyage dans le Finistère. Nouvelle édition accompagnée de notes historiques, archéologiques, physiques et de la flore et de la faune du département par M. Le Chevalier de Tréminville. Brest, J.B. Lefournier Impr. Librarie, 480 p.
Coat, Y., 1979 Goémons et goémoniers. Approche sociologique, économique et écologique de l'exploitation des algues en Bretagne. Mémoire de Maitise en géo-architecture. Brest, 76. p.
Courtois, B., 1813 Découverte d'une substance nouvelle dans le Varech. Ann. Chim., 88:304-10
De Blois, A., 1841 M. De Lannigou et M. Pinchon, Rapport sur l'état actuel de la récolte des goémons ou varechs dans l'arrondissement de Morlaix. Rapport fait à la Société d'agriculture de Morlaix, dans sa séance extraordinaire du 13 février 1841. Morlaix, Imp. Guilmer, 15 p.
De Lavenay, M., 1866 Rapport sur la récolte des goémons et engrais de mer. Rapport présenté au nom de la commission supérieurer de l'enquête agricole de 1866. Paris.
Desouches, M.J., 1962 Le goémon en Bretagne. Etude historique de la réglementation. Thèse de doctorat en droit. Université de Paris, 259 p.
Desouches, M.J., 1972 La récolte du goémon et l'ordonnance de la Marine. Ann. Bretagne, 79(2):349-71
Dizerbo, A.H., 1974 Sur l'histoire des algues et du goémon. Cah. Iroise, 21(2):91-7
Floch, J.Y., 1964 Distribution verticale et écologie des algues marines sur les côtes bretonnes. Penn ar Bed. 4(37):182-90
Floch, J.Y., 1965 L'exploitation goémonière en Bretagne. Rennes, Mémoire de D.E.A. en Sciences biologiques. Université de Rennes, 25 p.
Floch, J.Y., 1970 Répartition des phéophycées dans l'archipel de Molène. Rev. Trav. Inst. Sci. Tech. Pêches Marit., Nantes, 34(1):89-120
Hendrick, J., 1916 The value of seaweed as raw material for chemical industry. J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 35:1-365
Hevin, P., 1693 Coutumes générales réformées des pais et du duché de Bretagne avec les usances particulières. Rennes, Pierre Garnier Libraire, Tome 1:700 p., Tome: 2:760 p., Tome 3:848 p.
Huve, P., 1969 Le stade initial et son importance réelle dans le peuplement algal des surfaces rocheuses du littoral marin. Proc. Int. Seaweed Symp., 6:201-11
Limon, J.M.P.A., 1852 Usages et règlements locaux en vigueur dans le département du Finistère. Chap. X de la récolte et de la pêche du goémon. Quimper, Lion, Imprimeur de la préfecture X, pp. 351-450
Ogée, J., 1843 Dictionnaire historique et géographique de la province de Bretagne. Nouvelle édition revue et augmentée par MM. A. Marteville et P. Varin. Rennes, Molliex Libraire Editeur, Tome 1:354 p., Tome 2:986 p.
Perez, R., 1968 Les nouvelles méthodes de récolte et le repeuplement des champs de Laminaires. Sci. Pêche, (175):17
Perez, R., 1969 Le repeuplement des champs de Laminaria digitata (L.). Influence comparée de la coupe et de l'arrachage. Sci. Pêche, (181):1-10
Perez, R., 1973 Répartition des grands champs d'algues brunes sur les côtes françaises de la Manche Occidentale entre l'ile Grande et l'ile de Sieck. Sci. Pêche, (226):1-21
Richard, S., 1958 Sein, l'ile des Trépassés. Paris, Ed. A. Bonne, pp. 125-7
Sauvageau, C., 1920 Utilisation des algues marines. Paris, Ed. Doin, 390 p.
Thoer, F., 1909 Pennaoz e vez kutulhet ar bezin e pagan. Feiz ha breiz (Mae), pp. 135-43
Valin, R.J., 1760 Nouveau commentaire sur l'ordonnance de la Marine du mois d'août 1687. La Rochelle, Ed. Ligier, Tome 1:804 p., Tome 2:852 p.
<section>c</section>
APPENDIX 1: FIELD RESEARCH RESOURCES
PLOUGONVELIN
: Town Hall
LE CONQUET
: Town Hall
PLOUARZEL
: François PERCHOC, farmer and seaweed harvester,
Christoph QUEMENEUR, farmer and seaweed harvester (age 53)
Yves QUEMENEUR, farmer and seaweed harvester (age 75)
LAMPAUL-PLOUARZEL
: Town Hall
Mr. HUSIAUX, industrialist (age 77)
LANILDUT
: Town Hall
PORSPODER*
: Town Hall
Jean-Marie BOSSARD, farmer, seaweed harvester (age 80)
Jeanne BOSSARD, clerk (age 69)
Yvon BOSSARD, farmer, seaweed harvester
Yves COLIN, sailor and seaweed harvester (age 53)
Rene FALC'HUN, sailor and seaweed harvester
Joseph FILY, fisherman
François LE GALL, fisherman
Mrs. LE QUELLEC, wife of a seaweed harvester (age 70)
François REGUER, fisherman (age 85)
Pierre SEGALEN, historian
Jean-Louis VENNEGUES, fisherman (age 78)
LANDUNVEZ
: Town Hall
Jean-Marie VENNEGUES, farmer and seaweed harvester (age 81)
PLOUDALMEZEAU (PORTSALL)
: Town Hall
Jean BOSSARD, sailor (age 43)
Auguste TANGUY, seaweed harvester
LAMPAUL-PLOUDALMEZEAU
: Town Hall
Father CADALEN
LANDEDA
: Town Hall
Jean-Marie LAOT, sailor (age 72)
Jean PRONOST, seaweed harvester (age 58)
Ambroise ROUZIC, seaweed harvester (age 79)
PLOUGUERNEAU
: Town Hall
Andre ARPRIOU, seaweed harvester (age 72)
François CALVEZ, seaweed harvester (age 35)
GUISSENY
: Town Hall
KERLOUAN
: Town Hall
Yves CAVAREC, professional diver (age 45)
Yves GUILLERM, seaweed harvester and fisherman (age 78)
BRIGNOGAN
: Yves LE GAL, sailor (age 61)
René TROADEC, high-ranking civil servant
PLOUNEOUR-TREZ
: Town Hall
Françoise BUORS, farmer, seaweed harvester (age 60)
TREFLEZ
: Town Hall
PLOUNEVEZ-LOCHRIST
: Town Hall
PLOUESCAT
: Town Hall
Jean-Marie CALVEZ, farmer
Alain CORRE, fisherman, seaweed harvester (age 73)
Emile DEVAUX, industrialist
Jean ROUE, deputy mayor (age 68)
CLEDER
: Town Hall
SIBIRIL
: Jean-Marie PLEYBER, fisherman
ROSCOFF
: Town Hall
Albert CABON, historian
Charles ROIGNANT, fisherman (age 70)
BATZ
: Yvonne GUIVARCH, farmer (age 68)
Nicolas ROUALEC, historian (age 71)
Pierre ROUALEC, farmer (age 69)
* The presence on this list of many informants from Porspoder is due to the fact that many are members of the author's family, and that he resides in that commune. The author wishes to thank them and all informants listed here for their invaluable collaboration and their warm hospitality.
<section>d</section>
APPENDIX 2: RECENT EVOLUTION OF SEAWEED PRODUCTION AND NUMBER OF HARVESTERS
Year
Tonnages in Dry Weight
Numbers of Harvesters
Laminaria
Lichen
Fucuses & Ascophyllum
Driftweed
<section>e</section>
APPENDIX 3: CURRENT REGULATION OF THE MARINE PLANT HARVEST
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
MINISTERIAL ORDER NUMBER 2606P-4
DECREE
AUGUST 7, 1975
In reference to regulation of the marine plant harvest
Repealed text: Ministerial order of April 29, 1963 (BM 218) and its modification of February 22, 1974 (BM 449)
The Secretary of Transportation,
In view of the decree of January 9, 1852 on the exercise of maritime fishing and especially its Article 2 (BM Meth. No. 28, p.34);
In view of the decrees of July 4, 1853 providing regulation of coastal maritime fishing in the first four arrondissements (BM Meth. No. 28, pp. 42, 87, 121 and 154);
In view of the decree of November 19, 1859 providing regulation of coastal maritime fishing in the fifth arrondissement (BM Meth. No. 28, pp. 158 and 161);
In view of the decree of May 10, 1862 regulating coastal maritime fishing (BM Meth. No. 28, p. 212);
In view of the decree of February 8, 1868 providing regulation of the marine plant harvest and especially its Article 9 (BM Meth. No. 28, p. 527);
In view of the law of April 1, 1942 relative to maritime navigation qualifications (BM 383);
In view of the ordinance of June 3, 1944 on the organization of maritime fisheries, especially Article 4 (BM Meth. No. 28, p. 34, note 1);
In view of the modified order of December 1, 1960 regulating underwater fishing on the metropolitan littoral (BM Meth. No. 28, p. 417);
In view of the modified order of April 29, 1963 regulating the harvest of marine plants (BM Meth. No. 28, p. 505);
In view of the order of April 19, 1972 relative to the coordination of sea related activities of national administration (BM 347), modified April 30, 1974 (JO of May 15, 1974, p. 5155);
In view of the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries;
In view of the advice of the directors of Maritime Affairs;
In view of the opinion of the Interprofessional Committee on Marie Algae,
ORDER:
Article 1
The algae, wracks and sea plants, referred to hereafter as seaweeds are classified and defined as follows:
1. Shoreweed
2. Bottomweed
3. Driftweed
"Shoreweeds" are those which are attached to the bottom and can be reached by foot at low tide levels of equinoctial tides.
"Bottomweeds" are those which are attached to the bottom and to rocks and which cannot be reached on foot at low tide levels of equinoctial tides.
Also included in this category are all seaweeds growing on uninhabited islets which cannot be reached on foot at low sea levels of equinoctial tides.
"Driftweeds" are those which, detached by the sea, drift with currents or have been cast upon the shore.
Article 2
Cutting or collecting shoreweed and bottomweed is prohibited from sunset to sunrise and also on Sunday.
In order to protect the seaweed fields, uprooting of the plants is prohibited. Tools used in the harvesting of seaweeds should be conceived and used in such a way as to avoid uprooting. These restrictions apply only to seaweeds of the Laminaria family.
Section I
Shoreweed
Article 3
Without prejudice for the dispositions foreseen in Article 4 which follows, shoreweed harvesting is reserved to inhabitants of coastal communes and to the proprietors of farm land located in these communes, under the following conditions:
- anyone who has resided in the commune for six months has the right to participate in the harvest;
- proprietors or coproprietors of farm land located in littoral communes have the right to harvest shoreweed without being required to prove their residency when the land or part of a copropriety which they hold is composed of at least 15 ares, exploited by them personally.
Article 4
Algae of the Laminaria family and those of the Fucaceae family, belonging to the species Ascophyllum nodosum and Fucus serratus, intended for industrial use, may be harvested without need to justify residence in a coastal commune.
Article 5
Two cuttings of shoreweed may be authorized each year. The dates of the two periods devoted to the harvest are set at the beginning of each year, with the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute for Maritime Fisheries and after consultation with the mayors of the communes concerned, by order of the Director of Maritime Affairs. The duration of each period, which should include one low spring tide in conjunction, must not be less than 30 days. Notices must be posted at least ten days in advance announcing the opening day and the duration of each harvest period.
Notwithstanding the preceding dispositions and when justified by the circumstances, the Director of Maritime Affairs may, after consulting with the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries, authorize supplementary harvest periods between July 1 and October 30 in specific zones or at specific times.
Article 6
Harvesting of seaweed growing along quays or on stone constructions in the sea or along the shore is forbidden; it is also forbidden to harvest seaweed growing on the dykes or banks of rivers or canals.
Section II
Bottomweed
Article 7
The cutting of bottomweed may be accomplished by fishing boats only. It takes place between April 15 and December 31, with the exception of Ascophyllum, for which the cutting period occurs between April 15 and November 30.
Certain orders of the Directors of Maritime Affairs upon the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries and the Interprofessional Committee for Marine Algae may, when called for by the circumstances, prohibit the cutting of bottomweed in specific zones and at specific times, and may provide measures for order and police enforcement as judged necessary for the seaweed harvest.
Article 8
Individual authorization is required for the harvest of bottomweed, accomplished by means of any equipment, such as a diving suit, autonomous or not, which allows an immersed person to breathe without returning to the surface.
These authorizations are issued by the Director of Maritime Affairs of the area in which the breathing apparatus is to be used; the validity of the authorization may be limited to a specific sector and a specific period.
Article 9
Those persons who harvest seaweed with the aid of equipment figuring in Article 8 must maintain a distance of at least 100 m from all properly marked boats and small fishing craft, nets and other fishing gear, fishing or aquaculture installations.
Article 10
In the event of infraction of harvest regulations or abusive use of the equipment mentioned in Article 8, the Directors of Maritime Affairs may, as suggested by the Administrators of Maritime Affairs, revoke the authorization issued, after having allowed the person or persons in question the opportunity of defense.
Section III
Driftweed
Article 11
Harvesting floating driftweed from a boat is prohibited from sunset to sunrise and also on Sunday. It may only be done from a boat equipped for fishing.
Article 12
It is forbidden to establish seaweed fisheries on the littoral by means of stakes or otherwise.
Article 13
The Directors of Maritime Affairs may, on the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries and the Interprofessional Committee for Marine Algae, and after consultation with the mayors of the communes concerned, forbid the harvest between sunset and sunrise, also on Sundays, of driftweed cast upon the shore.
Section IV
Dispositions Particular to the Harvest of Red Algae in the English Channel
Article 14
The harvest of red algae, lichen, carrageens (Chondrus crispus, Gigartina mamillosa) and agar (Gelidium corneum) whether they be shoreweed or bottomweed, may only occur during an annual period beginning two clear days before the preceding May 1 and ending two clear days after the following November 1.
Nonetheless, orders of the Directors of Maritime Affairs, issued on the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries and the mayors of the communes concerned, may, if the circumstances demand it, prohibit harvesting in certain zones and at certain times within the established season.
Article 15
The harvesting of red shoreweeds is reserved for inhabitants of coastal communes. Nevertheless, from August 1 of each year until the closing date mentioned in Article 14, the harvest will be open to all harvesters.
Decisions of the Directors of Maritime Affairs, made on the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries and the mayors of the communes concerned, will determine, if necessary, the zones in which the harvest is thus authorized, as well as the authorized periods.
Article 16
The harvest of red algae, growing on inhabited islets and not accessible by foot at low seas of equinoctial tides is accomplished by means of boats equipped for fishing. Nonetheless, so as to ensure optimal exploitation of red algae resources growing on inhabited islets, the Directors of Maritime Affairs may, when circumstances require it, and on the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries, decide to authorize vessels not equipped for fishing to participate in this activity. Decisions of this kind specify the zones and period in which this participation is authorized. These authorizations are individual and may only be issued to those vessels which conform to standards of safety for harvesters and seaweed transport. They are valid only on condition that the red algae be harvested by foot on the islets, using no breathing equipment or mechanical gear.
Section V
Specific Dispositions for the Mediterranean
Article 17
The dispositions found in Articles 3, 4, 5, 7, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of this Order are not applicable to the Mediterranean littoral.
Article 18
In the Mediterranean, live algae or bottomweed as well as driftweed still afloat may be harvested by professional sailor-fishermen only. It may only take place by day, and by means of vessels equipped with crew-lists. The same applies to seaweed which the Highway or Civil Engineering Service has decided to have removed from ports and canals.
In no case may the vessels used come within 100 m of fishing installations or shellfish beds.
Article 19
In the seawater ponds of the Mediterranean, the harvest of live algae or bottomweed must be authorized by the Director of Maritime Affairs, on the advice of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries and after consultation with the mayors of the communes concerned.
Section VI
General Dispositions
Article 20
Seaweed of all species, growing or deposited by the sea within shellfish beds as well as duly registered fishing or aquaculture installations, belong to said installation.
Article 21
All measures for providing police enforcement and maintaining order during the harvest, whose objective is to regulate permanent conditions of seaweed exploitation are issued by order of the Directors of Maritime Affairs, without prejudice to police and civil order measures issued by other authorities.
Article 22
The order of April 29, 1963, modified February 22, 1973, is revoked.
Article 23
The Directors of Maritime Affairs are responsible for the execution of the present order which will be published in the Official Journal of the French Republic and inserted in the Official Bulletin of the Merchant Marine.
For the Secretary of Transportation and by delegation:
The General Secretary of the Merchant Marine
JEAN CHAPON
<section>f</section>
PAPERS ON PRACTICES OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT
Burke, W.T., 1982 Fisheries regulations under extended jurisdiction and international law. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (223):23 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Troadec, J.-P., 1983 Introduction to fisheries management: advantages, difficulties and mechanisms. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (224):57 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Christy, F.T.Jr., 1982 Territorial use rights in marine fisheries: definition and conditions. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (227):10 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Panayotou, T., 1982 Management concepts for small-scale fisheries: economic and social aspects. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (228):53 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
MacKenzie, W.C., 1983 An introduction to the economics of fisheries management. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (226):31 p.
Asada, Y., Y. Hirasawa and F. Nagasaki. 1983 Fishery management in Japan. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (238):26 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Beddington, J.R. and R.B. Rettig, 1984 Approaches to the regulation of fishing effort. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (243):39 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Smith, I.R. and T. Panayotou, 1984 Territorial use rights and economic efficiency: the case of the Philippine fishing concessions. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (245):17 p. French and Spanish versions in preparation
Arzel, P., 1984 Traditional management of seaweeds in the district of Leon. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (249):49 p. Issued also in French
