<title>Report of the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture Rome, </title>
<section>1</section>
PREPARATION OF THE DOCUMENT
This document reports on the discussions and outcomes of the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, which took place at FAO Headquarters in Rome, from 28 to 31 May 1996. Dr Manuel Martinez-Espinosa of the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI), organized the event as part of the Regular Programme activities. The Consultation was attended by 29 participants, of whom 14 were FAO staff members and 15 were external experts.
Apart from her valuable contributions to the Consultation, the assistance of Dr. Elizabeth Harrison, Lecturer in Social Anthropology, School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex (England), for editing the final version of most of the papers presented is kindly acknowledged. Thanks are also addressed to Dr. André Coche for his inputs.
Distribution:
Participants
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional and Sub-regional Fishery Officers
Selected list of experts
<section>2</section>
ABSTRACT
Martinez-Espinosa, M. (comp.)
Report of the Expert Consultation on Small-scale Rural Aquaculture. Rome, Italy, 28-31 May 1996.
FAO Fisheries Report. No. 548 Rome, FAO. 1996. 182p.
The objective of the Consultation was to provide FAO and its members with information and advice on the role of small-scale aquaculture in rural development. To this end, participants were asked to analyze and reflect on four keynote papers prepared by selected participants. The keynote papers covered four themes, identified in an overview paper: "Options for small-scale aquaculture development". The four themes were:
· Defining objectives and indicators and identifying target groups.
· The implications of integrating small-scale aquaculture within agriculture and rural development.
· The institutional context: the roles of the public/private sector.
· Options in research methods/approaches and mechanism for extension based on research results.
In addition, four information papers were presented and discussed. This document presents a summary of discussions and principal conclusions reached, followed by abstracts and full versions of the overview and thematic papers plus the abstracts of the information papers.
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS USED
ADCP:
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
AEA:
Agro-ecosystem Analysis
AIT:
Asian Institute of Technology
ALCOM:
Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme
AQUILA:
Regional Aquaculture Programme in Latin America
ARAC:
African Regional Aquaculture Centre
BID:
(IDB) Inter-American Development Bank
BOBP:
Bay of Bengal Programme
CATIE:
Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre
CEC:
Commission of the European Communities
CGIAR:
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIAT:
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture
CIFA:
Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa
CIMMYT:
International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement
CLSU:
Central Luzon State University
COPESCAL:
Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America
EIFAC:
European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission
FAO:
Food and Agriculture Organization
FIPIS:
Fisheries Project Information System
FIRI:
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FAO)
FPC:
Field Programme Committee
FPR:
Farmer Participatory Research
FSR:
Fanning Systems Research
GCP:
FAO/Government Cooperative Programme
GFCM:
The General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
GIS:
Geographic Information Systems
GNP:
Gross National Product
GTZ:
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
IAS:
Institute for African Studies
ICA:
International Center for Aquaculture and Aquatic Environments, Auburn University
ICLARM:
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDB:
Inter-American Development Bank
IDRC:
International Development Research Centre
IFAD:
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IICA:
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture
ILEIA:
Information Centre for Low-External-Input and Sustainable Agriculture
IMF:
International Monetary Fund
IPFC:
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission
IRM:
Integrated Resource Management
ISNAR:
International Service for National Agricultural Research
LUSA:
Land Use Systems Analysis
MAGFAD:
Malawi-German Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Project
MEDRAP:
Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Programme
NAC:
National Aquaculture Center
NACA:
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia and Pacific Region
NARS:
National Agricultural Research Services
NGOs:
Non-governmental Organizations
NORAD:
Norwegian Agency for International Development
ODA:
Overseas Development Administration
OECD:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OXFAM:
Oxford Committee for Famine Relief
PACON:
Pacific Congress on Marine Science and Technology
PRA:
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PVOs:
Private Voluntary Organizations
RESTORE:
The Research Tools for Natural Resource Systems Monitoring and Evaluation
RRA:
Rapid Rural Appraisal
SAAFSR-E:
Southern Africa Association for Farming Systems Research-Extension
SADC:
Southern African Development Community
SAP:
Structural Adjustment Programme
SDA:
Social Dimensions of Adjustment
SEAFDEC:
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre
SIDA:
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SIFR:
Study on International Fisheries Research
SSA:
Sub-Saharan Africa
T&V:
Training and Visit
TCP:
Technical Cooperation Programme
UNDP:
United Nations Development Fund
UNICEF:
United Nations Children's Fund
UNZA:
University of Zambia
USAID:
United States Agency for International Development
WB:
World Bank
ZAREP:
Zambia Agricultural Research and Extension Project
<section>4</section>
BACKGROUND TO THE CONSULTATION
The focus of the Consultation was small-scale rural aquaculture. This term requires some clarification, because the term "aquaculture" generally covers a broad range of culture systems and practices. These range from industrial scale intensive fish fanning undertaken principally for financial profit, to small-scale fish fanning as an integral part of rural development. The bulk of aquaculture production comes from small-scale farmers in rural areas. For many of the adopters of this kind of aquaculture, it is a secondary activity. It may be integrated with other aspects of farming, such as crop and livestock production, with each aspect enhancing the benefits of the others. Small-scale rural aquaculture has a potential for enhancing food security. It also has an important potential role in a number of other areas: as a supplement to incomes, a source of extra food, and a means of spreading risks. These features of small-scale rural aquaculture have made it a focus of
development assistance.
Although small-scale aquaculture has a long history in some parts of Asia (China and India for example) which is reflected in a thriving sector, optimism about the prospects for developing similar models elsewhere has waned in recent years. This is most marked for Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America. The precise nature of the "failure" is complex. However, certain factors are characteristic: the reluctance of farmers to adopt the technology, a tendency for ponds to be abandoned, less than optimal productivity, and the poor sustainability of aquaculture development projects. On the departure of external assistance, aquaculture activities have often slowed down, and eventually stopped. Arguably, such problems have beset many other aspects of rural development.
The FAO/NORAD/UNDP Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (1987) reviewed FAO assistance to aquaculture between 1974 and 1984. The Evaluation drew attention to a number of weaknesses in small-scale aquaculture development projects. These combined technical, economic and social factors. They often involved a failure to establish the economic viability and social acceptability of proposed culture practices. Other problems concerned the lack of well-articulated policies and rationales for aquaculture development, to faults in project design and conception, and to poor management.
Since this time, the context for aquaculture development has changed in many countries. There has been a revision of accepted approaches to government involvement in development. In many sectors, the role of the state is reduced and there has been a pressure to turn over previously government-controlled activities to the private sector.
Recently, a number of attempts have been made to learn from the findings of the Thematic Evaluation and the prevailing sense of earlier failure. These include the work of the FAO's Aquaculture for Local Community Development (ALCOM) Programme in Africa and the Regional Project for Aquaculture Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (AQUILA). Research has also been supported through the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) in Thailand, the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), the Overseas Development Administration of the UK (ODA), and the French Ministère de la Coopération et du Développement. The WB/FAO/UNDP/CEC Study of International Fisheries Research (SIFR) and its follow-up studies in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, have provided a comprehensive overview of research needs and an indicative action plan for research.
Although diverse in geographical coverage and approach, this work produced a number of common findings. These include the need for greater clarity about objectives, the means for their achievement and their measurement. Other findings concern the need to support aquaculture within the framework of rural development as a whole, the importance of the institutional context, the need for more iterative and appropriate approaches to extension, and the need to rethink the concepts of target groups previously in operation. Efforts to address these issues and to build on more participatory approaches to rural development (such as participatory appraisal and fanning systems research/extension are relatively recent).
Before the Consultation, little attempt had been made to digest or synthesize the implications of this work or to reflect on the impact and effectiveness of recent actions. Such a process was felt to be necessary in order to provide guidance for appropriate future actions. Planners and policy makers need a clarification of options, the key questions to ask for different contexts, and the likely results of subsequent choices.
The Consultation brought together selected experts from both within FAO and outside for critical discussion of four related themes. For each theme a keynote paper was presented, followed by focused discussion. On the final day, interim conclusions were outlined and their implications discussed as summarized in the next section.
<section>5</section>
SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS ^1
^1 The conclusions summarized in this table are the result of the discussion on background and information papers presented at the Consultation.
CONCLUSIONS
IMPLICATIONS/SUGGESTIONS
Concerning objectives and how they are to be ascertained.
The farmers most likely to be early adopters of even relatively low input aquaculture technology are not going to be the poorest people in any community, unless they are specifically targeted for support.
Aquaculture may not be the most appropriate option for the poorest of the poor, for example the landless, sick or elderly.
While the need for 'target group' participation in the planning and implementation of rural aquaculture is recognized, there are potential problems in fitting such participatory approaches into existing organizational, administrative and planning structures.
Every effort should continue to be made to develop low-input, low-cost aquaculture accessible to poorer strata of the rural population.
A deliberate emphasis on the "poor" as a target group may not always be appropriate.
PRA and RRA should be regarded as options which can be combined with other approaches as appropriate.
Concerning aquaculture as an aspect of rural development.
Aquaculture should be seen as one aspect of rural development, not an isolated technology. It must be integrated into a holistic approach to development. This requires a wider use of interdisciplinary approaches to rural development which include aquaculture.
This is mainly relevant in two areas:
Þ the organization of and approach to extension.
Þ the internal functioning of the FAO in terms of communication, structures and procedures. The current organizational structure of the FAO does not encourage interdisciplinary work.
FAO could help with the incorporation of aquaculture information into the wider agricultural data collection process.
More information about the impact of small-scale aquaculture on the environment must be fed into the international agreement process.
There is a need for more participatory methods at all decision making levels in FAO.
This entails:
Þ attention to the effects of the structural divisions of the FAO;
Þ the promotion of contact between units;
Þ a review of internal funding arrangements;
Þ improved communication through Information Technology;
Þ joint field missions for planning;
Þ training of FAO staff in management of and participation in group activities.
Concerning the role of the state and the private sector.
The effects of changes in the macro-economic environment in many less-developed countries on the development of small-scale rural aquaculture is not clear and needs to be better understood.
Changes in the resources available to aquaculture development and extension programmes have resulted in a greater emphasis on private sector involvement in the sub-sector without any proper understanding of the full implications of this.
There is a need for investigation of the impact of the changing macro-economic environment on small-scale farmers.
There is a need for a review and analysis of the wide range of institutions with which the FAO will be working, directly and indirectly, including those within the private sector.
The FAO should support governments in the necessary restructuring of extension, credit and marketing.
The FAO should have a continuing role in the support of national and regional information systems and cross-sectoral activities, between and within governments.
Concerning the location of FAO activity and research-development linkages.
Research should be iterative and adaptive to local conditions in order to meet development needs but this may require important shifts in the structure and focus of many aquaculture research institutions.
Given the acute pressure on resources available to the FAO, there is debate regarding on which level its interventions should focus - the regional level through specifically established bodies, national governments to assist in planning and policy development, or at the local level.
The FAO has an important role to play in the coordination of research efforts and the collection and dissemination of information.
NARs/NGOs and universities should be the principal contact points. FAO may also assist governments in the decentralization of research activities.
Regional offices and programmes should be emphasized over activities directed by headquarters.
FAO should not withdraw from immediate contact with the users of the technology and locally based institutions.
<section>6</section>
PROCEEDINGS
Abstract of Overview Background Paper
Abstracts and Discussions of Background Papers
Concluding Discussion
Abstract of Overview Background Paper ^1
^1 This overview document was not intended for discussion.
OPTIONS FOR SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
by Elizabeth Harrison
The paper highlights key issues which are critical to the development of small-scale rural aquaculture and synthesizes recent attempts at implementation. Although there remain diverse technical constraints to aquaculture development, less attention has been paid to the interaction of these with social, economic, and political factors. The focus is smaller scale, low input and output aquaculture. For many of the adopters of this kind of aquaculture, it is a secondary activity, providing a supplement of incomes, a source of extra food and a diversification strategy.
Despite the existence of a thriving sector in some areas, particularly parts of Asia, optimism about the prospects elsewhere has waned in recent years. In Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America, problems in small-scale rural aquaculture development are especially marked. There are parallels in many other aspects of rural development.
Data on aquaculture production should be treated with extreme caution. However, it is clear that the contribution of aquaculture to aggregate food supplies in Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America is minimal when compared to that of Asia. The great increases in aggregate aquaculture production in southeast Asia and parts of Latin America largely reflect the development of higher value species. The effects on the well-being of the poorest are uncertain.
Over the last thirty years, the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture by international development organizations has often replicated early approaches. A principal criticism has been that production was subsidized from government and donor funds without creating the stimulus required to ensure autonomy. Recent changes in the political and economic environment have led to a change of approach. The role of the state has been reduced, and the emphasis is now on decentralization and privatization.
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (1987) assessed FAO assistance to aquaculture between the period 1974-1984. A central finding was that there had been insufficient attention to the economic viability and social acceptability of culture practices. Recently, a number of attempts have been made to learn from the Thematic Evaluation. Although diverse, this work has produced a number of common findings. These concern: clarity about objectives and the means for the achievement and measurement; the place of aquaculture within rural development as a whole; the importance of the institutional context; and the need to strengthen research-development linkages. The paper discusses these findings and their implications.
As with many other technologies, those most likely and most able to become productive fish farmers are not the most needy. Policy makers face a dilemma: whether to focus development efforts on the resource poorest or to concentrate on technology development which may be viable in the long term but which is unlikely to be closely related to the needs of the poorest, at least in the short term. The intensification and consolidation of the activities of model farmers is increasingly seen as the key to sustained fish farming. However, these are not always easy to identify, because a strict dichotomy between commercial and subsistence orientation cannot be maintained. A further argument is that in addition to the characteristics of individual farmers, the status of the agricultural economy should also influence intervention. Factors likely to be important include population density and the availability of land. Decisions about target groups should be accompanied by awareness of
potential costs to non adopters. These include changes in the value of land and access to resources. Aquaculture is also likely to have an effect on labour relations and the value of labour. These occur both within and between households. The majority of aquaculture adopters are likely to have certain characteristics in common. They are more likely to be men, better off and better educated.
In order to improve small-scale rural aquaculture development, consideration of the institutional context is critical. The relationship between external donor and host institutions is important. It is often characterized by divergent expectations and priorities. In addition, in many places the stability of the institutional framework has generally been poor. Since the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture, there has been a change in focus away from the provision of tangible inputs towards capacity building. For example, in the context of Africa it is recognized that government supply of fingerlings is hindered by both technical difficulties and a lack of transport. The situation is less straightforward in many Asian countries where fingerling supply from government farms succeeded in popularizing aquaculture. Regarding the provision of credit, caution is warranted; small-scale rural aquaculture generally requires inputs that are available on-farm, and there are many cases of
credit becoming a tool to be manipulated by those least in need of it. Privatization is also not a simple solution because the private sector is made up of a diverse range of individuals and associations with different motivations and potentials which need to be properly understood.
Recognition that small-scale aquaculture is an aspect of farming rather than fishing may have a number of implications for the organization of extension. Suggestions have been made that the functions of a specialized aquacultural extension service should be integrated into the agricultural extension service. For donors, there is a need for better collaboration between fisheries departments with responsibility for small-scale aquaculture, and those dealing with other aspects of rural development.
Concern has been expressed that the relationship between research and development activities should be closer and better coordinated. In many countries, collaboration could be much stronger. There has been a tendency for researchers to concentrate on their technical speciality rather than development needs and constraints. On the other hand, it has been pointed out that many development constraints for small-scale aquaculture cannot be alleviated by research. Geographical information systems (GIS) have a potential for predicting viable sites for small-scale aquaculture development. Such data is useful as a starting point and obviously needs to be supplemented with political, institutional and social analyses.
Disenchantment with both the approach and the results of earlier rural development has led to more participatory approaches. These aim to enable local people to define their own agendas and to be active in the establishment of their needs. The application of these approaches to aquaculture is relatively recent. Examples exist in the work of ICLARM in Asia and Africa, and ALCOM in Africa. Participatory approaches have their critics. They may be construed as politically dangerous, because they are associated with independent decision making, self determination, and empowerment. Also, requirements of flexibility and adaptability are difficult for some organizations to meet. Development organizations thus face a challenge: how to give meaningful content to the participation they espouse.
Abstracts and Discussions of Background Papers
Theme 1: Objectives and Indicators for Aquaculture Development
Theme 2: The Place of Aquaculture in Rural Development
Theme 3: The Institutional Context
Theme 4: Research-Development Linkages
Theme 1: Objectives and Indicators for Aquaculture Development
by Richard Pretto
Abstract
The paper analyzes the short, medium and long-term goals of small-rural aquaculture development projects as well as the most commonly associated problems.
The main issues of aquaculture are discussed and criticized. In the past, fish culture was promoted without taking into consideration the other needs of the farmer, his family and rural community as a whole, such as roads, housing, latrines, wells, stoves, domestic supplies, medicine, clothes, education, and also infrastructure facilities for meetings, sports and religious activities, etc. These aspects should be analyzed at the time production plans are conceived.
New trends such as integration of small-rural aquaculture with other in and off farm activities, innovative extension methodologies and marketing survey strategies, are still in their early stages in Latin America. More recently, governments and NGOs are promoting demonstration farms for sustainable agriculture so that farmers may be self sufficient in such aspects as seed production, grow out, diet diversification and marketing. However, in general, these efforts are still considered small.
It is necessary to establish "Sustainable Development Committees" organized in provincial federations and national confederations to really ensure a sound technical assistance to the farmers. When farm by-products are utilized as fish feed, yields tend to be lower than those obtained when concentrated feed is given. However, when the quality and quantity of bio-fertilizer given is appropriate, high yields are reported. The important point is that production systems depending on local resources tend to be more sustainable. This paper stresses the importance of using bio-fertilizers and green manure in this type of aquaculture as well as the need to develop and adopt a series of standards in relation to organic fertilization, taking into consideration the specific situation of each region.
It is widely accepted that conventional methods for socio-economic rural diagnosis have not been very effective in determining the real needs and aspirations of people when development projects are formulated. In this context, new diagnostic methods have appeared, such as Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) and Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA), that incorporate community members in the identification, analysis and evaluation of their limitations and possibilities, according to their own perceptions, so that together with institutional facilitators priorities are established.
Factors affecting the sustainability of small-rural aquaculture such as seed production, fish feed, fish species, fishing gear, etc., are analyzed within the framework of the lessons learnt during the last years.
The economic feasibility of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture activities is strengthened when, in addition to components that directly influence the cost and current income, other elements, such as species diversification and integration within the context of multiple water users, the optimal use of family labour, processing crops, nutrient recycling, etc. are considered. The interaction of aquaculture with the environment is also discussed. Some general conclusions are taken from the paper and some related recommendations are made.
Organization of session
The session involved discussion of both the thematic paper and an information paper, Rapid rural appraisal, participatory rural appraisal and aquaculture, by Philip Townsley (Annex 2).
Discussion
The discussion revolved around two main areas: (i) the value of participatory approaches in target identification and monitoring/evaluation and (ii) the question of the choice of farmers with which to work. Underlying both of these was the more fundamental issue of how to set objectives for aquaculture development. In this initial discussion, the extent of agreement was partly determined by conceptions of the role of the Consultation. While for some participants, the Consultation constituted a forum in which the more effective promotion of small-scale aquaculture was the focus, for others the appropriacy of aquaculture over other technologies was itself in question. As one participant put it 'the reason these are poor farmers is not that they don't have access to fish'.
It was agreed that the success or failure of aquaculture development activities can be determined in two main ways: whether the activities succeed in the terms set by promoters; and whether they make sense for the farmers. Notwithstanding the importance of accountability to donors, it was agreed that farmers' own acceptance or rejection of the technology should ultimately be the most important criterion. Thus, adoption and retention are important indicators. These need to be supplemented by a range of other indicators, both qualitative and quantitative. Examples suggested included:
· improvement in farmers' management skills,
· species diversity;
· resource recycling;
· improvement in incomes;
· improvement in nutrition.
It was pointed out that there is sometimes a need to disaggregate the interests of different members of the household, for example when incomes and resources were not pooled and shared between all members.
Regarding the use of participatory approaches to monitoring and evaluation, it was pointed out that there is a difference between rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal (PRA). The former is useful for extracting information. It involves simplification and systematization and is thus a tool for developers. It may enable people involved in promoting aspects of development to get information more accurately and more quickly. Its greater accuracy lies in a methodology which involves the information givers identifying the key issues themselves to a certain extent. RRA is more limited in its scope and implications than PRA, which embodies notions of empowerment and local people defining their own solutions. PRA is thus ideally about much more than information extraction and may have political and resource control implications which are unlikely to be acceptable to all institutional actors.
From this, it was agreed that the notion of 'participatory planning for aquaculture' is in a sense a contradiction in terms; if it is decided in advance that one technology is most appropriate, then the intended beneficiaries have already been excluded from a vital part of the decision-making process. The acceptance of this fact does not however, preclude the use of less radical approaches in order to ensure the appropriacy of technology development.
In particular, participants agreed that it is important to use techniques of RRA in both the formulation and the implementation of aquaculture support activities. Doubts about the accuracy of RRA techniques were expressed by some participants. It was felt that they are more subject to error and bias than conventional survey techniques, particularly because of rapidity. The idea of 'triangulation' aims to address this worry, through cross-checking from at least three sources.
Moving on to the issue of whether 'target groups' should be identified in advance, initial discussion focused on the use of communal or group promotion. In Panama, according to the thematic paper, communal groups were used for education. Farmers then undertook productive activities on an individual basis. Farmers were also taught a wide range of skills and activities including rice cultivation and water management generally. Fish culture was secondary to these activities and the production of fish seen as a welcome by-product. Participants agreed that this approach appears to be appropriate for Panama, but caution is required in attempting to apply it elsewhere. In Africa in particular, group-based aquaculture has only been successful where there was a prior and well established history of collective practices.
Participants agreed that early adopters of aquaculture are unlikely to be the resource poorest in a community. Even very simple small-scale aquaculture involves a minimum of physical strength and access to resources to which the poorest of the poor simply do not have access. A number of participants stressed the importance of working with those farmers who show evidence of capacity to succeed. The constituents of this capacity were the subject of some debate. While there was general consensus about minimum capacity in terms of land and water availability, there was more disagreement as to whether it is justifiable, appropriate, or possible, to attempt to identify in advance those farmers with 'progressive' or 'entrepreneurial' attitudes. Some participants suggested that these are a necessary prerequisite for successful adoption, while others maintained that promoters should not impose such criteria. Participants agreed that although early adopters are likely to be better off
than many others in rural communities, the promoters of aquaculture should ensure the continuing availability of low-input and low-cost technology.
Where aquaculture is practiced at relatively low levels and by few people in rural communities, such as in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, there is little evidence of negative side-effects for non adopters. However, more intensive cultivation by many people has led to problems for poorer people in parts of Asia. These include loss of resource control and environmental degradation. Some participants stressed that acceptance of the fact that small-scale rural aquaculture will not necessarily benefit the poorest of the poor should be accompanied by sensitivity to these potential wider ramifications. Promoters of aquaculture should not focus on the technology alone, but should see it in its wider social context.
Theme 2: The Place of Aquaculture in Rural Development
by Sevaly Sen, Henk van der Mheen and Jennie van der Mheen-Sluijer
Abstract
Sub-Saharan Africa is characterized by rapid population growth, declining food production, stagnating per capita calorie consumption and environmental degradation This has affected both productivity and resource sustainability. The small-scale farmer experiences difficult trade-offs between a number of goals which usually include higher farm outputs, increased cash, greater food security and less family labour time in farm work. Risk avoidance, rather than profit maximization dominates household decision-making.
Small-scale aquaculture is a relatively new technology in southern and eastern Africa. As with many other new agricultural technologies, it is characterized by low rates of adoption, less than optimal productivity and poor sustainability of projects. Small-scale aquaculture and agriculture compete with each other in specific ways: with horticulture for land and water and with other on-farm activities for feeds and fertilizers. With regard to labour and capital, small-scale aquaculture does not compete with other on-farm activities.
Structural Adjustment Programmes in sub-Saharan Africa have led to a reduction in government extension budgets and rationalization of extension services, and the privatization of input supplies including the supplies of fingerlings for fish farming. Changes in credit availability are unlikely to directly affect the development of small-scale aquaculture as little capital is required.
Small-scale aquaculture offers good potential for income generation. Fish from small-scale aquaculture can contribute to improved food security, especially transitory food; insecurity. This is because fish is consumed not only when the pond is completely harvested but also throughout the year, through intermittent harvesting. Small-scale aquaculture can therefore contribute to the alleviation of poverty amongst the rural poor. Studies have shown that it is not always the better-off farmers who adopt fish farming, provided the extension approach and message are appropriate.
It is clear that aquaculture integrated with agriculture can contribute to rural development, but experience has shown that the most important critical factor is the extension approach, particularly whether adequate and appropriate information is made available to farmers. Existing extension approaches are characterized by "top-down" approaches, such as the Training and Visit System (T&V system) which is found in many countries in southern and eastern Africa. In most countries in these regions, a separate aquaculture extension service exists which is normally hierarchical and relatively small. Although integrating aquaculture into existing agricultural extension services is considered a good idea, the practical aspects of this integration are difficult. There may be problems of system overload, institutional barriers and a requirement to reverse the roles of current extension personnel. These problems are accentuated when government budgets to extension services are being
reduced.
There is an increased awareness that conventional approaches to research and extension are inadequate, and participatory extension approaches have been advocated to be more effective. Participatory approaches require significant changes in current extension services. These include: improvement of the capacity of small-scale rural farming households to analyze problems and identify opportunities, and encouragement of the development of local networks to disseminate information combined with monitoring the quality of knowledge transferred in order to avoid significant distortion of information. Also there is a need for training of field workers in communication and motivation skills, in addition to technical knowledge. Current indicators to monitor staff performance are not well suited to the implementation of a participatory extension approach to extension.
In conclusion, aquaculture extension should be integrated with agriculture extension and should be part of the overall rural development. The extension approach should change and become participatory. In rural development the challenge is not to ensure that farmers adopt certain activities or techniques, but to ensure that they are aware of the specific opportunities that exist in their situation.
Organization of session
The session involved discussion of the thematic paper and three information papers:
· Socio-economic Analysis of Aquaculture in East Africa: An Asian Point of View by Dilip Kumar (presented by Ulf Wijkstrom);
· Rural Aquaculture Framework for Country Reviews by Peter Edwards;
· Agricultural Extension by Abdallah Gaaya;
Discussion
The discussion highlighted the problem of trying to achieve rural development objectives in the context of a great reduction in resources. However, the participants agreed that the purpose of the Consultation was not to make recommendations on how to resolve these conflicts but to identify key issues which should be considered when taking into account small-scale aquaculture development.
The role of aquaculture in contributing to the achievement of rural development objectives within the changing macro-economic climate was discussed. There were three main areas of focus:
· extension approaches
· type of small-scale aquaculture
· role of the private sector
Participants agreed that a participatory approach to extension was more appropriate than a strictly technical focus. The challenge is to find a way of adapting the needs of a participatory approach to curtailed resources. A participatory extension approach requires a change in the present training of extension workers. Because of the complexity of integrated aquaculture systems, there is a need that extension workers understand the principles of aquaculture and are able to give site specific advice. This should be instead of predetermined extension messages.
In agriculture, the services try to overcome the problem that extension services are asked to do more with less resources by training extension workers more as facilitators who can assist the farmers in obtaining the needed information from the right sources. Extension is no longer just the transfer of technology. The agricultural extension services use other channels than their own service for disseminating information.
The observation was made that the participatory extension approach was much more suitable to farmers needs than the transfer of technology approach, but that at the same time there would be a need to empower the farmers to assist in the design of the extension messages and systems. The application of a participatory extension approach at the policy and planning level was identified as a problem for the full implementation of this approach. Furthermore, there is a lack of linkage between the jargon of participation among planners and rural reality, both that of farmers and their institutional counterparts.
A number of further issues and suggestions were raised:
· Instead of increasing aquaculture extension to a wide area, it would be more effective to concentrate the effort on those areas where there was a real potential for aquaculture development;
· farmers should participate in identifying problems and solutions;
· effectiveness of the approach depends on many conditions. No project has tested different extension approaches to enable comparison between approaches;
· there has been a change in attitude since the Thematic Evaluation. It is now recognized that there is a need for participatory approaches to extension and that "cookbooks" of technological solutions are not successful. The process has to be a problem solving iterative process between farmers, extension agents and researchers;
· participation should also work at the policy level.
The issue of production increase was raised. Small-scale farmers in most cases do not have the means to purchase farm inputs, and therefore integration of aquaculture into the farming system would provide the best option for maximizing production. The importance of different options for farmers was highlighted. Farmers should be able to choose the option that would fit best under their specific conditions. There are two broad categories of small-scale aquaculture based on input usage:
· culture using only on-farm resources;
· culture using on farm and low unit cost off-farm inputs.
The discussion focused on the target farmers for these two types of systems. Some of the participants felt that for small-scale aquaculture to evolve and produce sufficient quantities for both livelihood requirements, the use of off-farm inputs was the way forward, albeit incrementally. Other participants noted that many farmers do not have access to any off-farm inputs and it was therefore better to concentrate on optimizing uses of on-farm inputs. It was pointed out that viewing aquaculture as a separate activity without looking at the trends on agriculture development in a particular area was a mistake. Some participants agreed there was a need to define the types of farmers projects should be working with (poorest of the poor, rural middle class) whilst others thought that this was not possible. There was general agreement that there was a need for some criteria to identify potential target groups, although such a process was in conflict with a participatory approach.
Participants noted that fish competes with other crops for water and space. It is important to compare the production of fish with other crops, and to integrate. Multiple use of water should receive more attention.
Participants noted that the 'private sector' covers a wide variety of individuals and organizations. There is hence a need for care in specifying at any time which element of the private sector is being referred to. All participants acknowledged that fingerling supply should no longer be within sole control of governments, and that this was a common and successful trend. However, the role of technical assistance in this process needs to be discussed and clarified. It was hoped that these issues would be covered during the discussions for Theme 3.
There was some disagreement as to the negative effects of structural adjustment programmes. Some participants suggested that the greater emphasis on the private sector would have long term benefits, and that positive effects could already be seen, especially in the fisheries sector. Others argued that a sectoral understanding of the effects of adjustment policies gave an incomplete picture.
Theme 3: The Institutional Context ^2
^2 This paper was produced subsequently to the Consultation to reflect the thematic discussion.
by Arne Andreasson:
Abstract
The aims of the paper are to describe the institutional context of small-scale rural aquaculture and to indicate areas of current institutional changes and adoption of new strategies/approaches to the development of the sector. The legal and macro-economic frameworks for aquaculture development, policies and plans are also discussed. However, a rather narrow understanding of the concept of institutions is applied, close to the formal definition of organizations: a structure within which people cooperate according to accepted and recognized roles. No attempt is made to venture into theories of organizational or institutional development. Further, the focus is on governmental institutions and their interaction with the private sector (producers, associations, companies, non-governmental organizations, etc.), international organizations, in this case mainly FAO, and donor agencies.
The role of governmental institutions is changing rapidly. This is partly a result of changes in the macro-economic environment. Consequently, aquaculture development institutions need to find new, more effective means to reach their objectives and target groups. They also need to sharpen their arguments for funds for aquaculture development. Institution building, institutional development and strengthening of institutions were important aspects of development work in the 1960's and are again in fashion although with mixed results. Institutional constraints have in the past been attributed to lack of or limited "resources" such as trained staff, infrastructure and operational funds. Recent work on organizational and institutional development pays more attention to issues of motivation, incentive, reward and sanction.
There is a strong recent focus on private sector development. This is a wide concept which encompasses small-scale producers, farmers' associations, fish farming companies, companies producing seed, feed, tools and materials, and traders, as well as non-governmental organizations. Important issues for private sector development include the organization of fish seed development, marketing, and private sector extension.
The mode of operation of development aid projects is also changing. Projects, with expatriate personnel, working closely with counterparts in direct contact with the target groups are being replaced by indirect interventions. The focus on institutional development occurs at the same time as aid is increasingly being channeled through NGO's, which often are believed to be in a better position to support grass-root development than the governmental institutions.
Recent developments are changing the traditional mode of operation of FAO. Budgets have been cut which have resulted in reduction of headquarters staff. The field programme has been drastically reduced. It is unlikely that this reduction is compensated by increases in bilaterally funded and executed projects. The effects of the changes have not yet been fully reviewed but are likely to lead to an increased focus on the normative role of the organization.
Organization of session
The session was led by Sunil Siriwardena. Because of a lack of adequate information provided by the commissioned background paper, the session leader presented a set of issues that had arisen from previous presentations to establish a base for discussion for the institutional context. In addition, one information paper was presented, 'Use of macro-economic information in policy formulation and planning for government support to small-scale rural aquaculture', by Pierre Justin Kouka.
Discussion
There was a consensus that institutional strength is crucial to the success of small-scale rural aquaculture development. However, what this means in practice was less clearly agreed. Some participants focused on the problems and weaknesses facing partner governments, while others were more concerned with the FAO's own organizational context and the critical relationship between the FAO and governments.
Participants agreed that in many parts of the world, there is a lack of government-commitment and capacity and low priority for the development of rural aquaculture. This is accompanied by an increasing trade-off between government and private sector activity. Nevertheless, participants stressed that there is still an important role for governments, particularly in the effective regulation of the private sector.
The need for credit was discussed. It was agreed that credit includes not only financial aspects but also include many types of in-kind, informal arrangements. While mixed feelings arose from the discussion on the subject, it is understood that some type of credit availability would certainly help small-scale farmers to achieve their goals, especially at early stages of production (pond construction and fingerling stocking).
While there was a consensus on the redefining of the role of extension, the idea was mentioned that there should be a distinction between two types of extension: general extension aimed at addressing a variety of questions related to agriculture and aquaculture in general and specialized extension aimed at addressing questions specific to a given area of aquaculture such as water quality, fish health, and so forth. Participants agreed that there are currently serious problems facing existing extension - for agriculture as well as aquaculture. These include the tendency for better qualified people to move from the 'front-line' of extension and not be replaced.
A number of participants stressed the need to address the organizational context of FAO itself, both in terms of its internal structure and functioning and in its relationship and approach to partners. Regarding internal functioning, it was noted that despite prior invitation, very few participants from services other than fisheries had found the time or the inclination to attend the meeting. A primary aim of the Consultation had been to build communication and discussion between diverse sectors, especially because of the importance of small-scale aquaculture as part of rural development in general. This aim was only partially achieved, possibly because of the sectoral priorities and commodity focus within the organization.
Regarding links with partners, it was generally felt that in the context of reduced governments intervention, it is important for the FAO to rethink its relationship with host governments and find a different way of operating. The lack of national representatives at the Consultation was noted.
Over the last few years many international organizations have prioritized non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as the best vehicle for the delivery of aid. Participants agreed that there was a need for more concerted coordination between the various institutional actors, including NGOs. In the context of increased decentralization, national governments and international organizations such as FAO still have a role to play.
Theme 4: Research-Development Linkages
by Randall Brummett and Boyd Haight
Abstract
Rural small-scale farmers carry out their farming activities in a complex physical and socio-economic environment, the elements of which have been addressed in the context of rural aquaculture by other thematic papers. Research and extension provide methods and tools for understanding this environment, developing improved farming technologies and promoting their adoption by farmers.
Research in developing countries is hampered by many of the same constraints as extension. Education of researchers is focused on techniques and methodologies which are not always appropriate to their situation. While numbers of scientists have risen over the last decade, overall funding by national programmes has decreased, dramatically reducing the availability of funds per researcher. In the longer term, revitalization of the scientific establishment in developing countries is essential if these are to keep pace with the rapidly changing global economy. Addressing the immediate needs of small-scale farmers is, however, not a highly capital-intensive activity. Thus, in the short-term, directing research at the problems faced by small-scale farmers might actually help reduce the conflict between the desire to produce quality results and the imperatives imposed by shrinking budgets.
Researchers too often work at intellectual levels and reside in physical locations which are difficult for farmers to access directly. Traditionally, the extension service has been given the task of acting as an intermediary between researchers and the farming community. The extension agent is supposed to go out to the farm, collect information about both perceived and unperceived needs of farmers, and transmit it to scientists. The system seldom works as designed. Extension often fails to accurately perceive the situation of the farmers and transmits to researchers misinformation or none at all. Researchers consequently drift off course and begin concentrating on topics which they find personally interesting, but for which there may be no practical application in small-scale fanning systems. Unfortunately, extension and research are often housed separately, often in entirely different government departments and hence seldom interact with each other. Extension agents are not
invited to research meetings and vice versa. Researchers tend to scorn the more poorly educated extension agents, just as the extension agents scorn the farmers. None of these conditions creates an atmosphere conducive to the flow in information.
In the traditional view, extension is the key to information flow both to and from researchers and farmers. Extension agents are expected to be half scientist and half farmer, able to pick up and understand a technical journal article, put it into the specific context of his or her target community, and then communicate the information effectively to farmers. An institutional framework in which field work is viewed as unprestigious and a sump for unproductive or junior staff must be revised.
Since it was largely based on the erroneous assumption that aquaculture innovation could be evaluated independently of other farm activities, most aquaculture research has been aimed at the fish pond in isolation. While such research is perfectly valid for commercial fish-only agrobusinesses, there is little demand for the data it generates among resource-poor, small-scale farmers who employ mixed-cropping systems. Farming systems analysis and farmer participatory research are potential ways forward. New methodologies for conceiving and conducting research have evolved from field trials, in which the farmer's perspective is fully appreciated and farmers are incorporated into the research process from the beginning. Farmer-participatory approaches aim to capitalize on the strengths of both modem science and traditional knowledge bases.
Organization of session
The session was led by Randall Brummett. No additional information papers were presented.
Discussion
The discussion in this session revolved principally around the issue of how to make research more iterative and responsive to farmers' needs and the links between this and extension.
Participants agreed that a good indicator of the appropriacy of research was farmer satisfaction, and that it is important not to 'push' one form of technology over another. However, doubts were raised about the linkage between this sort of research and extension. Some participants suggested that farmer-to-farmer extension is the most effective way of transferring information. Others expressed concern that if this were relied upon as the main method of extension, it would be impossible to control for side effects. These might include the conveyance of inaccurate or misleading information and the consolidation of inappropriate practices.
A number of participants felt that these side effects were not a serious problem. They argued that farmers' decisions, not those of aquaculturists, should be prioritized. If these decisions did not always make sense to the promoters of aquaculture, it did not mean that they were not logical and valid so far as farmers were concerned, even if they did not result in the production of more fish. This position was contested by those who pointed out that for aquaculture research to be funded rather than any other, there was a need to illustrate its greater value and usefulness. Thus, there may be a trade-off between the political and accounting needs of development support and the needs of farmers.
Concluding Discussion
1. Organization of session
The session was led by Elizabeth Harrison who began by reviewing the principle issues which had been raised in discussion over the preceding three days. These issues were initially grouped under nine headings. During the course of subsequent discussion among the consultation participants these were modified to 11 headings (see below). Discussion of these key issues was organized in five small groups of three to four people, with two facilitators assisting in the recording of discussions.
The discussion was carried out in two phases. During the first, the issues suggested by the session moderator were reviewed and prioritized and any important issues not included in the initial list were identified. This led to the addition of issues 10 and 11 and the modification of some of the other points. In the second phase, groups were asked to consider the implications of the Consultation findings for the FAO. Following the group discussion and submission of written reports, a brief review of the issues raised by various groups was prepared by the moderator and a plenum discussion of key points held. Most of the discussion groups consolidated the issues into groups and the reporting of the discussion is also organized in this fashion.
2. Key issues arising from the Consultation
2.1 Objectives and indicators - Difficulties in establishing development objectives as well as appropriate indicators for the relative success of small-scale aquaculture given the variability of the objectives held by different potential target groups in different locations.
2.2 Target groups and "adopters" - The rural poor, or other groups, frequently targeted for rural aquaculture in order to improve their food security are often not the best target groups from the point of view of adoption rates as they may lack access to the basic resources and knowledge required for rapid adoption of aquaculture technology.
2.3 Implications of participatory approaches - While the need for higher levels of "target group" participation in the planning and implementation of rural aquaculture (and rural development in general) is recognized, there are potential problems regarding fitting such participatory approaches into existing organizational, administrative and planning structures.
2.4 The integration of aquaculture into rural development and farming systems approaches - For the purposes of rural development activities, aquaculture should not be regarded as a separate discipline but has to be fully integrated into a holistic approach to development and improvement of farming systems. This requires a wider use of genuinely interdisciplinary approaches to rural development which include aquaculture.
2.5 Interdisciplinary and interdivisional links within the FAO - The current organizational structure of the FAO does not encourage such interdisciplinary work.
2.6 The role of the State - macro-economic policy and structural adjustment - The effects of changes in the macro-economic environment in many less-developed countries on the development of small-scale rural aquaculture is not clear and needs to be better understood.
2.7 The role of the State - encouraging the private sector - Changes in the resources available to aquaculture development and extension programmes have resulted in a greater emphasis on private sector involvement in the sub-sector without any proper understanding of the full implications of this.
2.8 Similarities and variations between regions - The insufficiencies of a "blueprint" approach to rural aquaculture development seem to be widely accepted but there are nevertheless important similarities between regions which need to be understood, as do the key variations from one part of the world to another.
2.10 Sustainability - Some of the factors which are important to ensure sustainability now seem to be better understood but they often conflict with the time constraints and planning requirements of national and international development organizations.
2.11 Levels of intervention for the FAO - regional, national or local? - Given the acute pressure on resources available to the FAO, there is debate regarding at which level its interventions should focus - the regional level through specifically established bodies, the national level to assist governments in planning and policy development, or at the local level to assist in the identification of real needs at the community level.
3. Findings of Working Groups
3.1 ISSUES 1-3: Concerned with the Objectives of Rural Aquaculture and how they are ascertained
It was widely agreed that even small-scale rural aquaculture is far more readily adopted by relatively wealthier groups in rural communities. The "poor", who have often been targeted by rural aquaculture programmes in the past, frequently face considerable problems in effectively making use of aquaculture technology or gaining access to the resources required to make it work. Inappropriate targeting of this kind has often led to the "failure" of aquaculture programmes in the past in the sense that benefits did not reach predetermined target groups.
While recognizing this problem, other participants expressed concern that the poor could be ignored as a potential target group for aquaculture. There may be a need to differentiate between the "poor", who may be able, in certain circumstances, to take up small-scale aquaculture activities, and the "poorest of the poor", who are likely to be extremely marginalized groups such as the old, the sick or refugees and who are unlikely to have access to the sort of resources required for fish farming of any kind.
As a result it seems to be agreed that, while every effort should continue to be made to develop low-input, low-cost aquaculture technology accessible to poorer strata of the rural population, a deliberate emphasis on the "poor" as a target group may not always be appropriate.
New approaches to needs identification, objective setting and development planning, such as RRA and PRA were seen as means to improve the appropriateness of the aquaculture solutions being proposed. As they generally incorporate multidisciplinary approaches they can also ensure better incorporation of aquaculture into rural production systems.
However, some of the risks in using participatory approaches "out of context" were also highlighted. Development approaches which aim at empowerment of local communities require adaptive political, social and institutional frameworks which are not always available. The need to regard RRA and PRA as options which can be combined with other approaches as appropriate was highlighted.
Particular mention was made of the problems in incorporating participatory planning approaches at the field level with the more traditional "top-down" modes of planning commonly used in governments and development institutions. Means of linking participatory planning in the field into mechanisms for policy formulation and national planning were felt to be generally lacking.
Participants' perceptions of the importance of these problems regarding participatory approaches were not all the same. It was mentioned that greater attention paid to the "ground rules" for use of participatory approaches and the sort of limits likely to be encountered in different contexts could remove some of the perceived difficulties.
3.2 ISSUES 4-5: Concerned with the integration of aquaculture into rural development as a whole
The importance of small-scale rural aquaculture being approached as one component or option for rural development was emphasized by many participants. The need for a more widespread adoption of holistic fanning systems approaches was seen as of key importance in ensuring that aquaculture is adopted as a development option only where it is genuinely appropriate and where it addresses specific needs recognized by intended beneficiaries themselves.
The risk of aquaculture losing its identity during the process of integration into "rural development" was also highlighted. Examples were given of how, once aquaculture is incorporated into a more integrated development approach, it can easily end up being given such low priority that it is practically ignored as a potential solution to problems of rural income-generation and food supply, especially in areas of the world where it is not yet widely practiced. The very limited attendance at the consultation of staff from the agricultural sections of the FAO, in spite of prior invitation, is also indicative of the generally low importance attached to aquaculture in relation to other rural production systems.
In this connection, the need to promote aquaculture and its potential, as well as analyze past problems and failures, was also mentioned. However, one fanning systems specialist participating in the consultation noted the need for proper demonstration of aquaculture's usefulness as an option, with well-documented proof of its current and potential contribution. While such documentation is available from many parts of Asia, information and cases from Africa and Latin America need to be made more readily available. Materials promoting aquaculture clearly need to show how it compares to the range of alternatives generally available.
The structural inadequacies of many development organizations to accommodate the kind of multi- and inter-disciplinary work which more integrated rural development approaches require was also noted by many participants. The FAO itself was felt to have considerable difficulty in ensuring the proper incorporation of different disciplinary skills and knowledge into its rural development activities. Poor communications between units and divisions, excessive compartmentalization and inappropriate budgeting arrangements were all seen to contribute to the persistence of single disciplinary approaches in spite of the setting up of more holistically-oriented units such as the Sustainable Rural Development Division and the Extension Division.
At government level, participatory approaches require new mechanisms and planning procedures which can link participatory planning efforts at the field level with the policy formulation processes at higher level. Techniques for doing this are not always available.
3.3 ISSUES 6-7: Concerned with the role of the State in Aquaculture Development
The effect of structural adjustment programmes and changes in the macro-economic environment obviously have complex, and sometimes paradoxical, impacts on the formulation processes at higher level. Techniques for doing this are not always available.
3.3 ISSUES 6-7: Concerned with the role of the State in Aquaculture Development
The effect of structural adjustment programmes and changes in the macro-economic environment obviously have complex, and sometimes paradoxical, impacts on the development of rural aquaculture. The need to assist governments in analyzing these effects was identified by several participants as a possible role for the FAO.
One generally recognized impact of these economic changes is the reduction of resources available for government programmes of all kinds and the consequent withdrawal of governments from many development, promotional, extension and support programmes which they engaged in previously. For aquaculture development, this clearly means that the role of government in providing key support services such as extension and fingerling supply has to be reconsidered and alternative channels identified.
The possible role of the private sector, particularly in fingerling production and supply was repeatedly mentioned as of great importance, but it was also pointed out that the current trend to encourage co-operation between development institutions and the private sector has greatly expanded the range of possible counterparts for rural aquaculture development programmes.
The implications of decentralization processes undertaken by national governments need to be taken account of and understood. Some participants noted the confusion between decentralization on the one hand, and the devolution and delegation of authority on the other.
3.4 ISSUES 8-11: Concerned with Regional and Site-to-Site Variation, Research Implications and the Role of FAO
Variations (and similarities) between regions and individual sites are significant. A generalized, blueprint approach to aquaculture technology development was accepted as being generally inappropriate but lessons from one area need to be communicated to others. Some disagreement arose over the way in which research feeds into development in the field. Participatory approaches to development emphasize the need for research to be reactive to the needs and problems encountered at the field level. On the other hand, the representatives of research institutions clearly feel that prior research to develop viable technical options is of key importance. Compromise solutions which combine the two elements need to be worked out according to local conditions.
This highlights the need for both global and regional co-ordination of research efforts and the collection and diffusion of information, this being an important role for the FAO. The FAO's "bird's eye view" of world-wide developments can be of great assistance to governments trying to refine and develop new policies for rural aquaculture development. While the weaknesses of transferring techniques developed in one area directly to another was widely recognized, the FAO can make important contributions by developing and diffusing methodologies, whether for research, extension, needs analysis, development planning or policy formulation.
Other potentially important contributions of the FAO would be in assisting governments in developing appropriate research strategies and techniques and in balancing adaptive and technical approaches to aquaculture research. Assisting governments in the decentralization of research activities might also be important.
The relative level of intervention of the FAO was also discussed. While generally the FAO's role as a global and regional focal point for information collection and diffusion was recognized, there was also concern expressed over the possibility of the FAO becoming isolated from the realities of the field, particularly as the funding for field projects is steadily reduced. The need to keep open channels to the "grass-roots" was felt to be important and, while the FAO will inevitably continue to deal primarily with governments, contacts with properly recognized, more locally-based institutions, such as NGOs or local administrations need to be maintained in some form.
3.5 GENERAL ISSUES
The role of the consultation itself was discussed at some length. On the one hand, some participants were anxious to see concrete and workable recommendations produced by the meeting while others were emphatic that the consultation was a "first step" in analyzing the issues facing rural aquaculture development and further discussion and research would be required before recommendations or proposals could be produced. In particular, given the emphasis placed by participants on the incorporation and integration of aquaculture into more generalized rural development processes, the importance of greater involvement of agricultural and extension specialists in the discussion was highlighted.
<section>7</section>
Appendix 1: Options for Small-Scale Aquaculture Development (Overview Paper)
by Elizabeth Harrison
1. BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
2. RECENT REFLECTIONS ON SMALL-SCALE RURAL AQUACULTURE
3. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR SMALL-SCALE RURAL AQUACULTURE
REFERENCES
1. BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
1.1 Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture: Definitions and Limitations
1.2 Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture: Magnitude and Trends
1.3 Current Assistance to Aquaculture Development
1.1 Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture: Definitions and Limitations
The term "aquaculture" refers to a diverse range of practices, undertaken in equally diverse locations with varying constraints, potentials and objectives. According the FAO, aquaculture is the "farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs and crustaceans and aquatic plants". This refers equally to large scale, high input, industrial fish culture and small-scale, low input, low output fish farming. Not only is each very different in terms of culture technique, but objectives are likely to diverge. For the former, principal motivations relate to productivity and financial profit. For the latter, a complex blend of food security, income generation, livelihood strengthening, and diversification are all likely to be important. Between the two extremes are varying levels of input and intensity of cultivation: a continuum.
The bulk of international assistance has been to smaller scale, low input and output aquaculture. This is also the focus of this document. For definitional simplicity we refer to this as small-scale rural aquaculture; the term should also convey notions of fish farming as an aspect of rural development, with objectives related mainly to household food security and income generation. For many of the adopters of this kind of aquaculture, it is a secondary activity, providing a supplement to incomes, a source of extra food, and a diversification strategy. Such small-scale rural aquaculture may be integrated with other aspects of farming, such as crop and livestock production, with each aspect enhancing the benefits of the others.
Much coastal aquaculture is undertaken at a small-scale, for semi-subsistence purposes. However, coastal aquaculture and inland fish fanning have a number of significant technical and social differences. Principally, it is often undertaken by people who have a greater association with fishing than with farming (Pollnac 1982). Systems of land and water tenure and control tend to be different; communal ownership and exploitation may be more common. The activity may be an supplement to fishing rather than an aspect of farming.
Although small-scale rural aquaculture has a long history in some parts of Asia (China and India for example) which is reflected in a thriving sector, optimism about the prospects for developing similar models elsewhere has waned in recent years. This is most marked in Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America. However, some parts of Asia with little history of small-scale fish farming have faced problems too. The precise nature of the "failure" is complex (see 2.3 below). However, certain factors are characteristic: the reluctance of farmers to adopt the technology, a tendency for ponds to be abandoned or badly managed, less than optimal productivity, the poor sustainability of aquaculture development projects. On the departure of external assistance, aquaculture activities often slow down, and eventually stop.
Straightforward comparison with the aquaculturally developed countries of Asia is misleading for two reasons. Firstly, the long history of fish farming in much of Asia is overlooked. More importantly, the comparison should be placed in context. These problems also occur in attempts to promote many other technologies for rural development, from small livestock to agroforestry. Political and economic weaknesses have combined with inappropriate or insensitive projects, often reflecting donor priorities rather than the needs of the farmers or national governments. In analysis of the problems facing small-scale rural aquaculture development, it is important to learn from other sectors too.
In 1987, the FAO/NORAD/UNDP Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture drew attention to a number of weaknesses in aquaculture development projects. The problems related to the lack of well-articulated policies and rationales for aquaculture development, to faults in project design and conception, and to poor management. These are elaborated in part two, below.
Recently, a number of attempts have been made to learn from the findings of the Thematic Evaluation and the prevailing sense of earlier failure. These include the work of the FAO's Aquaculture for Local Community Development (ALCOM) programme in Africa and the Regional Project for Aquaculture Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (AQUILA I AND II). Research has also been supported through the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) in Thailand, the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), the Overseas Development Administration of the UK (ODA), and the French Ministère de la Coopération et du Développement (Lazard et. al 1991). The WB/FAO/UNDP/CEC Study of International Fisheries Research (SIFR) and its follow up studies in Sub-Saharan Africa (Coche et al 1994) and Latin America (AQUILA II 1994), have provided a comprehensive overview of development and research needs and an indicative action plan for research.
Although diverse in geographical coverage and approach, this work has produced a number of common findings. These include the need for greater clarity about objectives, the means for their achievement and their measurement. Other findings concern the need to support aquaculture within the framework of rural development as a whole, the importance of the institutional context, the need for more iterative and appropriate approaches to extension, and to the need to rethink the concepts of target groups previously in operation. Efforts to address these issues and to build on more participatory approaches to rural development (such as participatory appraisal and fanning systems research and extension) are relatively recent. Little is therefore known about their impact and effectiveness.
The aim of this discussion document is to highlight some of the key issues which have emerged as central in the development of rural aquaculture and to draw together recent experiences of attempts at their implementation. Through a process of synthesis and analysis, it aims to suggest key issues of policy and practice. The document focuses mainly on non-technical factors. Technical constraints to aquaculture development remain important. However, in the past, insufficient attention has been given to their interaction with social, economic and political factors. A fuller understanding of these aspects may give greater scope for technical success.
Part one provides an introduction to small-scale rural aquaculture, reviewing trends in the regions and the history of its promotion. Changes in international assistance to aquaculture, with regional differences, are outlined, as is the current status of projects and development assistance.
Part two reviews the issues in greater detail, synthesizing and analyzing the results of the studies mentioned above. These are placed within the overall context of the findings of the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture.
Part three is a discussion of alternative approaches to rural development in general, and their application to small-scale rural aquaculture development in particular. This includes an analysis of the concept of participation and the methodologies which result from it, and of new approaches to project planning. Case studies of the application of recent findings on small-scale rural aquaculture support the discussion.
1.2 Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture: Magnitude and Trends
1.2.1 Data Limitations
Because the products of small-scale rural aquaculture are only partially marketed, and objectives relating to the production of fish are only part of the story, quantification is inherently problematic. Aggregate statistics of production and aid may disguise as much as they reveal. Without knowledge of the constituents of production data, or details of the level of support for different types of activities, it may be all too easy to draw simple and inaccurate conclusions.
On the one hand, production figures are notoriously unreliable. Satia (1989) points out in his survey of aquaculture in Africa, that in Kenya, as much as 50% of aquaculture production is consumed directly and therefore not recorded. The recent FAO Review of the State of World Fisheries Resources for aquaculture (FAO 1995b) qualifies its data by noting a number of problems. These include inconsistency in data from member states because of changing methods of classification; problems relating to the definition of aquaculture and its separation from capture fisheries; missing data; the paucity of data on the domestic market for aquaculture products.
Equally important however in the case of small-scale rural aquaculture, is the fact that the link between the rationales of food security and livelihood strengthening and simple production of fish is by no means obvious. Although useful as one among a range of indicators, this kind of data gives scant information about the use of the product, who is doing the fish farming, and ultimately, who the beneficiaries are. Per capita production and availability figures give little indication of what is happening to individuals because of disparities in how individuals gain access to resources. Increases in overall production do not necessarily mean increases in consumption for those most in need.
The disparities are caused by a range of determinants: gender, age, social status, ethnicity. They operate both at the level of the community (how particular groups or households gain access to benefits), and within households themselves. These disparities are well documented and discussed in much literature relating to rural development in general, but the way they operate in the context of small-scale rural aquaculture is only beginning to be explored (Harrison et al. 1994). For example, though the fish produced through rural aquaculture may be cheap in comparison to other sources of animal protein, a minimal purchasing power is required as well (Ben-Yami 1986). Those who can afford to by may well not be those with the most serious nutritional needs, and linkages need to be established. Similarly, the existence of aquaculture within a household does not automatically indicate benefits for all members. This may depend who controls the product, and on distributional
practices. Negative effects can include the use of human food for fish fodder and the diversion of household labour from staple crop production.
The following data should therefore be read as indicative of broad trends only. They can provide only a partial indicator of the role that small-scale rural aquaculture actually plays in rural livelihoods.
1.2.2 Aggregate Aquaculture Production
The importance of aquaculture to national food supplies varies greatly by region.
In 1992 aquaculture contributed 24% of the fish supply in Asia, but only 1.9% in the former USSR and Latin America, and 1.3% in Africa. In Africa south of the Sahara, the contribution was less than 0.7% (FAO 1995b). For Africa, though fish is an important part of overall animal protein consumption, no major aquaculture producers has an annual per caput aquaculture output of more than 1 kg. For example, Zambia derives 25% of its animal proteins from fish, but only 1.7% of this from aquaculture.
Although in total, African production has increased from 24,000 t in 1984 to 67,000 t in 1992, and its share of global value produced has more than doubled in the same period, there were marked disparities between Africa North and South of the Sahara. The increase in share of aquaculture value indicates a trend towards the culture of more valuable commodities North of the Sahara, destined for European markets. It therefore is not necessarily illustrative of a consolidation or development of small-scale rural aquaculture.
The major aquaculture producers in Sub-Saharan Africa are Nigeria (63%), South Africa (12%), Kenya (4%), Zambia (4%), Zaire (3%) and Madagascar (2.5%). Among the larger producers. South Africa and Zaire expanded production more than ninefold between 1984 and 1992, and Kenya more than fivefold.
In Asia, Chinese aquaculture production dominates the region. Chinese aquaculture represents 49% of global production by volume, but only 30% of its value. This is because in general Chinese aquaculture has resulted in the production of cheap food through the predominance of the culture of carps, whereas in other parts of Asia, there have been significant increases in the production of higher value species, especially shrimps. Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand were the major producers. Thus, though China produced more than four times the volume of aquaculture products than Southeast Asia in 1992, the value of the sub-sector was only 1.6 times as great. The food security and income diversification effects of the cultivation for shrimps for export are unlikely to be the same as those of small-scale rural aquaculture in ponds as described above. However, as elsewhere, little production data is available for this kind of aquaculture in Southeast Asia.
A similar picture exists in Latin America, where there has been a great expansion of aquaculture, in terms of both volume and value. Volume increased by nearly 180% during the period 1984-1992 to reach 2.3% of the global total, while value increased by 270%. The major producers are Equador (36%) and Chile (21%). Chile has had a massive expansion, but this has been due mainly to salmon ranching. In Equador, shrimp culture is predominant. Again though, less is known about the production from small-scale rural aquaculture.
1.2.3 The Promotion of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture
Small scale rural aquaculture developed in parts of Asia without significant external promotion over thousands of years. In China, aquaculture dates back at least four thousand years. Other countries, such as Vietnam and the Philippines have practiced aquaculture for around 300 years. There is huge variation in types of culture system, according to both environmental factors and economic and social structure. In general though, the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture has been able to build on a background in integration and intensive resource management - something often lacking in Latin America and Africa south of the Sahara. In these regions, governments and international donors have been active in the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture over a relatively short timescale - almost entirely within the last century and predominantly over the last thirty years.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, early attempts to develop aquaculture took place during the colonial period (Harrison 1994). Initially aquaculture was introduced as a source of exotic fish such as trout, for sport fishing. The major drive to introduce aquaculture as a source of food came in the 1950s. During this time and in the 1960s, there was a rapid expansion offish farming in the region. Colonial authorities encouraged the digging of ponds, supported by the provision of fingerlings from government hatcheries and extension. By 1960, it was estimated that over 320,000 ponds had been built in 30 countries (Balarin 1988). There is however little indication of levels of activity or benefits derived from the ponds.
There is a consensus that by the 1960s, the results of most colonial efforts were beginning to collapse (Grover et al. 1980, Pillai 1988, Satia 1989). One reason was that the newly independent states were not in a position to maintain the infrastructure (particularly extension and fingerling supply), established by the colonial powers. In addition, pond maintenance and management reflected the initial lack of commitment of farmers who were often coerced or given financial incentives to construct ponds. There were numerous technical difficulties in pond construction, water supply and over-breeding of tilapia. Colonial and early post colonial attempts at small-scale rural aquaculture development therefore are considered to have failed because of a combination of faults in conception and approach and technical weakness.
The second wave of promotion of aquaculture has taken place over the last thirty or so years, with the support of international development agencies. Aquaculture projects have aimed to build or rehabilitate infrastructure such as state farms and hatcheries. They have also been involved with staff training, fingerling production and distribution and support to extension. Behind all of this was the aim of increasing the production of cultivated fish in the region. To a lesser extent, projects have been involved in applied biotechnical research, data collection and studies of the potential for development.
National support to aquaculture development has included extension and the supply of production inputs, research, education and training. This support has been influenced by a range of factors: the political and economic environment, physical resources, the need to respond to donor requirements. In Africa during the 1980s, a number of countries have accepted structural adjustment programmes. There has been a rethinking of accepted approaches to government involvement in development. In many sectors, the role of the state is increasingly reduced. Effects have included cutbacks in government expenditure on infrastructure and welfare services and the cutting of subsidies which have supported public sector employees. As with other sectors, aquaculture has been affected by a lack of operating funds and poor morale among public sector employees. At the same time, there has been pressure to turn previously government - controlled activities over to the private sector. Most
significant among these activities is the production and distribution of fingerlings.
A range of weaknesses have been identified in national institutional support to aquaculture development. The sector usually receives low priority for development funds, which is a problem shared with the agriculture sector in general. In most countries there is also no coherent national plan for aquaculture development, although aquaculture receives a mention in national development plans. Although not characteristic of the aquaculture sector alone, there has been a heavy reliance on external funding. As a result, projects and development activities are often based on donor priorities
In Latin America, small-scale rural aquaculture development is characterized by a very different political and socio-economic context. Nevertheless, there are many parallels with the Sub-Saharan African case. As in Africa, there is little history of small-scale rural aquaculture development and the influence of structural adjustment policies is still being felt. International assistance began to flow to the region during the 1950s and 1960s because it was felt that small-scale rural aquaculture could make a significant contribution to rural development. Although more recently attention has been paid to marine shrimp, early development efforts focused on the culture of freshwater fishes. The US Agency for International Development (USAID) was the major donor, working in close collaboration with Peace Corps volunteers. Assistance was particularly focused on Central America, Brazil, and Colombia. Again as in Africa, the strategy was essentially the creation or strengthening of
fish culture stations from which to deploy extension.
A common practice for the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture has been to subsidize production activity from government funds without creating the stimulus required to achieve autonomy (AQUILA II 1994). Extension services in the region are constrained by a lack of operational funds and transportation. Other problems identified include:
"Lack of training and extension work, lack of care in identifying the social groups to be benefitted and in understanding their culture and traditions, and often an absence of economic logic that could justify the self-sustainability of the activity, have been the main causes of failure of these projects" (AQUILA II 1994;127)
On the termination of external assistance to aquaculture development, a familiar pattern emerged; a substantial reduction of activity, and a failure to maintain fish culture stations. For example in Guatemala there was massive abandonment on conclusion of the Programme for the Extension and Development of Aquaculture in 1979. Similar reports exist for Paraguay, Honduras and El Salvador (COPESCAL 1991). However, as Wijkstrom (1989) notes, the main limitations were not of a technical nature. Institutional weakness was much more important
Recently, government and donor support to small-scale, subsistence, oriented aquaculture has been reduced. There are fewer projects supported with international development aid, and the majority of assistance now comes from non government organizations. As in Sub-Saharan Africa, this occurs in the context of a trend towards declining state intervention, deregulation and privatization. Centralized planning models are no longer the dominant paradigm.
1.3 Current Assistance to Aquaculture Development
According to information supplied by donors and collated on the Fisheries Project Information System (FIPIS) database, between 1988 and 1993, more than 440 aquaculture projects were started. More than US$910 million was committed to aquaculture grants and loans during the same period.
In the six years to 1993, the proportion of all aquaculture aid to Asia fell from 80% to 74% of the total, while the proportion to Africa rose from 11% to 15%. The proportion of aquaculture aid to Latin America has remained static at around 5% of the total. Of all of these projects, 39% were bilateral and a further 35% multilateral. About 18% were executed by FAO. However, in monetary terms, 72% of aid to aquaculture was provided by the development banks, with 16% bilateral and 6% multilateral donors.
The data available in FIPIS gives a broad overview of assistance to the sector. This assistance however covers a wide range of interventions, many of which are not directly relevant to small-scale rural aquaculture development. The kinds of activity covered by FIPIS are divided into ten categories. Of these, by far the majority of projects are directed towards research rather than directly productive activities. Details of the nature of the assistance and particularly the approach taken in aquaculture development projects is, however, not available.
2. RECENT REFLECTIONS ON SMALL-SCALE RURAL AQUACULTURE
2.1 The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture
2.2 Post-Thematic Evaluation Perspectives
2.3 Rethinking Objectives
2.4 The Institutional Context
2.5 Aquaculture as Farming
2.6 Research and Development Linkages
2.1 The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO/NORAD/UNDP 1987) reviewed FAO/UNDP technical assistance to aquaculture during the period 1974-1984. Thus, it did not consider the contributions of other international or national assistance during the period. However it did provide a wide-ranging analysis of some of the problems confronting aquaculture development, particularly in Latin America and Africa south of the Sahara. Although the focus of the Evaluation was not solely on small-scale rural aquaculture (the potential for industrial aquaculture is also discussed), most analysis and policy recommendations follow the assumption that the fish farmer is a operate at a small-scale and sees aquaculture as a means of risk spreading.
The Evaluation was based on a study undertaken between 1984 and 1986. Fifty three projects were reviewed in a desk study. Thirty nine of these in 15 countries were visited.
According the Evaluation, assessment of the success or failure of aquaculture development projects was hampered by a lack of post-project evaluations. Impact was however felt to be most visible in Africa and to have been greater for projects where assistance had been continued over a long period. The Thematic Evaluation specified a number of problems regarding support to small-scale rural aquaculture. In 1976, an FAO-sponsored conference in Japan had made a number of recommendations (the Kyoto Strategy) which subsequently formed the basis for FAO-executed projects. According to the Thematic Evaluation, there was however, a fundamental weakness in the Kyoto Strategy: its assumption that the problem was one of the optimal management of research, training, and extension, thus not focussing attention on the "need in each instance to establish the economic viability and social acceptability of proposed culture practices" (FAO/NORAD/UNDP 1987; viii).
Problems varied by region, but most were concentrated in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa. Some of the most important are summarized in box 1, below.
On the basis of these findings, the Evaluation also made a number of recommendations. The recommendations referred to project identification, design, and implementation. Key elements of the recommendations are summarized in box 2. In addition to these, regionally specific recommendations were made. While for Africa and to a lesser extent, Latin America, the emphasis was on the development of extensive and semi-intensive tilapia culture, in Asia the stress was more on the intensification of existing activities.
Box 1: Key Findings of the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture
Poor project design and preparation
Projects were initiated in a haphazard manner without supporting analysis to relate the likely results to national socio-economic needs.
"few donors have a well articulated policy for their technical assistance in aquaculture. This is reflected, on occasion, in hasty and uncritical attempts to transfer technology, often not suitable to the needs of the recipient country" (FAO/NORAD 1987; vii)
A failure to learn from earlier mistakes, especially in Africa
The majority of projects launched in Africa essentially replicated and were based on the same premises as those launched in colonial times. They rehabilitated old stations, and tried to reestablish what already existed. In many cases, the same personnel from colonial projects were employed on development projects in me 1960s and 1970s:
"...few analyses were ewer made of the reasons for the collapse in the first place in order to draw lessons for the design of future projects. No analysis has ever been published" (FAO/NORAD 1987;40)
Weak headquarters-field staff cooperation
Failures in project implementation were strongly influenced by the weaknesses in cooperation between field staff and those in the headquarters of sponsoring organizations. Project management was hindered by a tendency to concentrate on achieving physical results as opposed to transfer of know-how to counterpart staff.
A lack of government commitment and capacity
The continuation of results achieved had been jeopardized in countries where government commitment was too low, or capacity was small. Several projects were hampered by government failures to provide agreed counterpart contributions.
Box 2: Key Recommendations of the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture
The conditions for aquaculture development
* That detailed attention should be given to the recipient government's effective commitment to aquaculture.
* That fish species selected should be economically viable and socially acceptable.
Rationales
* That governments should formulate the rationale for which UNDP/FAO technical assistance is requested.
* That both aquaculturists and social scientists should participate in the appraisal of the project rationale.
Project design
* That project design should involve careful selection of counterparts
* That aquaculture projects should be integrated with fisheries development, agriculture and/or rural development
* That project activities should not be initiated without an effective commitment of at feast ten years from the parties concerned (UNDP/FAO and the recipient government).
Assistance to extension
* That assistance to extension should be such that in the last one to two years, the donor agency only pays for expatriate staff. More use should be made of model farmers and extensionists from agriculture
Inputs
* Whenever technical assistance is provided in relation to seed production, the skills and knowledge should be effectively conveyed to other aquaculture producers. Hatchery technology should be within the reach of me average producer.
* Attention should be paid to improved use of agricultural by-products.
Research
* The first priority for research should be that which will help provide direct support to practicing aquaculturists.
2.2 Post-Thematic Evaluation Perspectives
Since the Thematic Evaluation was carried out, a number of studies and interventions have gathered and analyzed information relating to small-scale rural aquaculture. In several cases, the findings of the Thematic Evaluation were a significant reference point and motivator. Importantly, the stress on the need to understand the social and economic context for small-scale rural aquaculture development, and its interaction with the technical, has been influential. The call for a more holistic approach to small-scale rural aquaculture development has been reflected in the topics and key issues covered. This post-Thematic Evaluation work includes the following:
RESEARCH/INTERVENTION
Aquaculture for Local Community Development (ALCOM)
Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, and executed by FAO, the Programme has been involved in research, methodology development, and pilot-scale interventions in the SADC region of Africa since 1986. It has produced more than 50 reports and studies, as well as a regular newsletter.
Regional Projects for Aquaculture Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (AQUILA I and II)
The projects ended in 1994. Phase I started in 1985 and phase II in 1992. AQUILA was first based in Brasilia and subsequently moved to Mexico city. Both phases were financed by the Italian government and executed by FAO. The projects aimed to be catalytic, working with countries throughout the Latin American and Caribbean region. They were responsible for the coordination of a range of courses, studies, and information dissemination activities.
The International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM)
ICLARM is a member of the Core Group of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR) and is based in the Philippines. ICLARM scientists have conducted extensive research with farmers, from a farming systems perspective. Most work takes place in Asia, but there have also been projects in Malawi, Sierra Leone and Ghana.
Asian Institute of Technology (AST)
The AIT is an autonomous, international, post-graduate institution and is based in Bangkok, Thailand. Its activities include education, research and outreach. An aquaculture outreach project in Northeast Thailand, funded by the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the UK, explicitly treats aquaculture as an aspect of rural development.
STUDIES
WB/FAO/UNDP/CEC Study of International Fisheries Research (SIFR)
The study was promoted by a consortium of eighteen bilateral and multi-lateral development agencies, covering both fisheries and aquaculture. Because of a criticism of weak recipient-country involvement in the determination of priorities, follow up studies took place for aquaculture at the national level and were analyzed to establish regional and sub-regional priorities and action plans
Ministère de la Coopération et du Développement (France)
A study of aquaculture projects in Francophone Africa was carried out and an action plan proposed on the basis of this.
Overseas Development Administration of the UK (ODA)
Between 1991 and 1993, the ODA supported research which aimed to analyze the reasons for the supposed failure of small-scale rural aquaculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. Research was carried out in Zambia, Malawi, and Kenya.
This work is clearly diverse, in terms of both scope and objectives. Nonetheless, some of its key published outputs have significant overlaps and commonalities. These are the subject of the following section.
Key texts referred to are:
AIT 1994. Partners in Development: The Promotion of Sustainable Aquaculture
ALCOM 1994. Aquaculture into the 21st Century in Southern Africa. Report prepared by the working group on the future of ALCOM.
AQUILA II 1994. Diagnostico Sobre el Estado de la Acuicultura en América Latina y el Caribe. Including SIFR follow-up report
AQUILA II 1994. Resultados y Recomendaciones Del Proyecto. Project final report.
Coche et al 1994. Aquaculture Development and Research in Sub-Saharan Africa. Synthesis of national reviews and action plan for research. SIFR follow-up study.
Harrison et al., 1994. Fish Farming in Africa: what's the Catch? Summary of ODA research project findings and recommendations
Lazard et al, 1991. Pisciculture en Afrique subsaharienne. Report of study of the situation of projects in francophone Africa.
2.3 Rethinking Objectives
It is unlikely that small-scale aquaculture will be a panacea for fundamental problems of protein shortage and undernutrition. This has been accepted by its promoters for some time (Ben Yami 1986). Not only are the poorest of the poor not in a position to adopt aquaculture, given its minimal requirements of labour and land, but there is no inevitability that the products of aquaculture will reach them. Purchasing power, marketing infrastructure and alternative sources of protein all intervene. On the other hand, there is a real potential for small-scale rural aquaculture to contribute to improved livelihoods for some farmers.
Policy makers thus face a dilemma. This dilemma reflects a need for clarity about objectives and the means by which they might be reached. Poverty focused objectives require that specific efforts are made to reach the poorest and most vulnerable people. However, it may often be the case that for these people fish farming may not be the best or even a possible option. The choice then appears stark: either to try to develop activities and approaches which reach the resource poorest, or to focus on technology development which may be viable in the long term, but which is unlikely to be closely related to food security - at least in the short term. As with many other technologies, those most likely and most able to become productive fish farmers are not the most needy. The greatest food security and/or income impacts often coincide with lower levels of production.
This dilemma is increasingly acknowledged: "The dual objectives of increasing the income of the fish farmer and improving nutritional well-being may be contradictory" (ALCOM 1994;21). It has implications in two important spheres. First, the issue of target group identification: is there a difference between those that that the promoters of aquaculture choose to work with, and those that they expect to benefit? Second, the establishment of appropriate indicators for monitoring and evaluation. If indicators such as aggregate production of fish or numbers of ponds dug are inappropriate, then what are the alternatives? Obviously, the success or failure of aquaculture development can only be assessed if adequate criteria are provided. But measurement of food security and livelihood enhancement benefits is not straightforward.
2.3.1 Target Group Identification
Target group identification has been addressed in a number of ways. A first step is often the creation of typologies of different kinds of aquaculture operation and aquaculturist. From these, decisions about whom to work with and how, may be expected to follow. A common trend is to characterize aquaculture operations according to degree of commercial orientation, with a focus on the greater development potential of those with slightly more resources and an entrepreneurial attitude. There is thus a stress on the efficiency of working with "model" farmers who show potential to intensify their operation, and to market an increasing proportion of their product.
This view is not held by all. For example, ICLARM scientists argue that "As resource poor farmers are the new target, and as exceedingly few of them culture fish, ways must be devised to gain new entrants into aquaculture rather than increase the fish production on the few existing farms." (Lightfoot and Pullin 1994; 9).
However, for many, intensification and consolidation of the activities of these model farmers is increasingly seen as the key to sustained fish farming. This is in marked contrast to an earlier orthodoxy that aquaculture is a technology to help improve the livelihoods of the poorest farmers and that as many of these as possible should be assisted in their fish fanning.
For example, Lazard et al. (1991) distinguish four types of aquaculture, based on the level of development. The findings are based on a study of francophone Africa:
1. Aquaculture for self-consumption ("family" based)
2. Artisanal aquaculture, producing for the market at a small-scale
3. Aquaculture where particular stages of the production process are taken on by different producers.
4. Industrial scale aquaculture
The first characterizes more than 95% of the ponds in the region. It is undertaken in earthen ponds by farmers for whom it is a marginal activity, poorly integrated into the rest of their farming. The authors argue that these kind of culture systems have on the whole had negative results. For the fish farmers, the satisfaction gained from small-scale fish farming is not sufficiently attractive to outweigh the effort and degree of technical expertise required. For the future, it is suggested that aid to this kind of aquaculture should concentrate on support to those farmers who show signs and capabilities of adopting more intensive methods.
Small scale market-oriented aquaculture, according to this characterization, involves only a few hundred people in Africa. They have generally learnt about fish farming from development projects, practice aquaculture in either rural or peri-urban environments, and come from a wide variety of backgrounds. For the majority, fish farming is not their only activity, but it may be a significant part of their business operations. In the rural setting, this form of aquaculture tends to be integrated with other agricultural activities, and is an important extra source of income.
The authors conclude that artisanal and small/medium scale market-oriented aquaculture has the most development potential. They stress the need for economic viability of aquaculture enterprises themselves, rather than reliance on development project inputs. They argue that for the present, aquaculture cannot be a possibility for all farmers. Target groups should be identified, not only according to expressed interest, but according to technical competence, and to the likely role of aquaculture within their other activities. Farmers should be encouraged to weigh the costs and benefits of undertaking aquaculture in comparison with these other activities. This approach, it is argued, is preferable to earlier ones of mass development, followed by natural selection.
The third type of aquaculture is characterized by a structural division of the different phases of production. Again, it may be undertaken by entrepreneurs in different locations. Industrial aquaculture has strictly financial objectives, and is undertaken on a large scale. The authors warn that there is a risk of competition between this level of aquaculture and the second, market-oriented, type.
A similar approach was developed in the context of the AQUILA II project for Latin America (AQUILA II 1994, Martinez-Espinosa 1994). Again, a basic distinction is made in terms of degree of commercial orientation of the operation. In this schema, the distinction is between aquaculture for the poorest ("type one"), and aquaculture for the less poor ("type two"). Type one is essentially subsistence-oriented aquaculture. Farmers consume most of what they produce at home. Type two is characterized by a higher level of basic resource-ownership of the producer, and an entrepreneurial approach which involves a degree of cost-benefit analysis. It is argued that in the current context of reduced state intervention, it is more sensible for development support to be concentrated on type two aquaculture.
On the basis of these considerations, the AQUILA II project undertook a study of the feasibility of type two aquaculture in two locations in Colombia and Venezuela. The greatest problem identified was that of creating an environment conducive to the participation of both public and private institutions in the development of the sector. It is suggested that in Latin America, there are good prospects for undertaking aquaculture in associations of producers rather that at an individual, subsistence, level.
The typologies of different target groups discussed above are recognized by their authors to be only approximate: delineating boundaries is difficult. As noted in the introduction, aquaculturists form a continuum with varying degrees of commercial orientation. A strict dichotomy between "subsistence" and "commercial" operations is therefore inappropriate. Purely subsistence farmers do not exist. The balance between the elements of production which are consumed within the household and those which are sold or exchanged, is constantly changing. With increasing intensification, farmers are likely to market all or some of the product. What is important is not "commercial" or "subsistence", but issues arising from the degree and form of commercialization. For example, how does increased commercial orientation change control over resources and spending patterns within the household? Does increased commercialization of one aspect of productive activities result in changes
elsewhere? What are the linkages to other parts of the economy?
The ALCOM programme has also been concerned with target group identification and the relevance of different approaches to particular contexts. For example, in a study conducted for the project in Luapula Province Zambia (Wijkstrom 1991), a distinction is made between aquaculture development priorities in stagnant and in growing economies. Development actions must be sensitive to the economic context. It is argued that in stagnant economies, where farmers are poor and underemployed and have access to more land and water than they can use, their contribution to economic growth is greater, per kg of fish produced, than in economies which are growing and have competition for resources. Thus, the poorer the household of the underemployed farmer, the larger is the justification for spending government funds on introducing fish farming to him or her. A successful fish farmer is defined as one who is exploiting his or her ponds. However, it was found that no simple procedure can be
used for identifying in advance what will make him or her successful
The author argues that the status of the agricultural economy should influence the nature of intervention. In stagnating economies, the aim is to stimulate interest in fish culture, to help the farmers with essential basic information such as how to construct ponds which hold water, but not to aim on a permanent extension activity for as long as the economy remains stagnant. As long as there are farmers with the minimal resources required, they should be encouraged to grow fish. In areas with a growing economy, it is recommended that efforts concentrate on increasing the productivity of existing fish farmers. Means of doing this include the encouragement of commercial fingerling supply, working through agricultural extensionists, and developing government fish farms for research, development and training.
Comparative studies in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi (Harrison et al. 1994) support certain aspects of these findings. The economic context for the development of aquaculture is likely to influence levels of production and management subsequent to adoption. However, in an environment with perceived abundance of the resources required to adopt aquaculture, and a shortage of other economic activities (such as Luapula Province, Zambia), adoption may not follow a strict cost-benefit analysis. Farmers may be more likely to ask "why not?" rather than "why?", and their decisions are based on a diverse range of influences. Management levels may then reflect a lack of knowledge of the requirements of the technology. The presence of diverse economic opportunities, effective marketing channels and perceived scarcities makes it more likely that the adoption of fish farming will be weighed more carefully. Management levels and productivity then reflect a greater knowledge of the risks and
likely gains of the adoption of aquaculture.
The implication of these findings for target group identification, and the siting of support to aquaculture development is that where the aim of support to fish farming is the establishment of autonomous knowledge, certain factors are likely to be influential. First, population density and the availability of land. Where farmers are relatively close to each other and ponds are closer to houses, the prospects for sustainability are higher. In addition, if there is greater perceived scarcity of land, it is more likely that the decision to dig a pond will be based on a sound assessment of costs and benefits. Second, and relatedly, if there are well developed marketing opportunities and infrastructure, there are better chances that the efforts of fish farming promoters will survive after their departure.
The decision to support a specific target group, such as established entrepreneurs, accompanies particular assumptions about the reasons for aquaculture development, who the ultimate beneficiaries will be, and the nature of the processes which give rise to the benefits. If a limited number of slightly better off farmers are supported for reasons of increased productivity, there is usually an assumption that knowledge and motivations established among such farmers will trickle down to others. This assumption clearly needs to be examined. If greater availability of fish for the malnourished is the aim, then focussing on model farmers may be irrelevant to the poorest people who cannot afford to buy fish anyway.
Equally, there is a possibility that not only will the slightly rich get slightly richer, but there may be a cost which is borne by others (Harrison 1994). Where aquaculture development is accompanied by increased social differentiation, there may be disguised costs for the most vulnerable. For example, the value of land or productive resources may increase, while access becomes more competitive. Negative environmental effects are as likely to harm non-aquaculturists as aquaculturists. Aquaculture, as with other new technologies is also likely to have a significant effect on labour relations and the value of labour. This occurs both within and between households. Of particular concern is the extent to which aquaculture, which is predominantly adopted by men, results in increased labour burdens for women and children without corresponding benefits (Trottier 1987, Harrison 1994, Woodford Berger 1987). There is a need to supplement cost-benefit analysis with attempts to reveal
the less visible aspects of change.
The evidence from Africa is limited, but indications are that at the level at which it is currently practiced, aquaculture has not had serious negative effects for non-adopters or for members of aquaculturists' families. Where aquaculture has taken root, effects have generally been positive (Harrison et al. 1994). However, there is still much more work to be done to establish the wider validity of this conclusion. Evidence from Asia indicates a need for caution. For example, in Java, brackish water pond cultivation has led to an increase in socio-economic differentiation. Smallholders who were only tenants rather than land owners were worst affected (Hannig 1988). In Bangladesh, the promotion of shrimp culture in paddy fields has been economically successful, but has generated an income distribution favouring those controlling the most scarce resource - land. Costs are borne by those who are not the main beneficiaries of the development (de Campos Guimaraes 1989).
Most information indicates that, regardless of promoters' attempts at targetting, the majority of adopters of aquaculture have certain characteristics in common; they are more likely to be men, better off and better educated. This is the case with many new technologies. It reflects both resource availability, the ability to access extension services, and the attitudes which often accompany these characteristics. Measures taken to explicitly avoid this situation (such as providing direct assistance to the resource poorest) could involve targeting aquaculture to those people for whom it may well not be the best option. Demaine et al.. (1994) concluded for the AIT Aquaculture Outreach Project in Northeast Thailand that "Until access to ponds improves or until these can make a bigger all round contribution to the rural household livelihoods, perhaps through a more integrated farming approach around the pond, the project may have to resign itself to working with the rural middle
class" (Demaine et al. 1994).
Aquaculture in groups
With aquaculture, as most development interventions, the advantages and disadvantages of supporting formal groups are regularly debated. On the one hand, it is felt that for some people, most notably women, groups provide an opportunity to overcome the constraints they face as individuals. On the other hand, these groups may become dominated by an elite and are often beset by disputes over control of funds. Success or failure of group approaches to aquaculture arise from the motivations which induce groups to form. Problems invariably arise when formal groups are created in expectation of assistance such as loans or grants.
In Luapula Province, Zambia, a women's and a youth's fish fanning group existed mainly as conduits for passing loans and grants. Very few fish were produced. In the "youth" group, acrimonious debate raged over the destination of the grants (Harrison 1993a). In the Lake Basin area, of Kenya, "women groups" are a popular form of organization. Many of these groups have been established for as much as 20 years. Success or failure is directly correlated with the degree to which the primary motivation for formation was income generation or grant acquisition Harrison (1993b). Most women who have received training from an FAO supported project have done so as part of a women's group. Fish farming is usually one among a range of other activities undertaken by the group.
On balance though, the evidence suggests that group-based aquaculture in Africa has not been a great success (Mashapa and Matobo 1988, L'Heureux et al. 1990, Murnyak 1988). Grover et al. (1980) suggested that communal management practices cannot be sustained because of a lack of incentives, and because of disputes over rights to the harvest.
Issues of relevance to the success of attempts to introduce collectively managed aquaculture include the existence of past successful collective activity. Local leadership, management ability and the strength of local services were found to be important in the context of cooperatively managed fish ponds in Panama (Schwartz et al. 1988). In both Latin America and Africa, there are locally specific examples of cooperation and reciprocation, especially between kin. Kinship relations play a particularly important role in determining rights and responsibilities with regard to labour. Problems are more likely to arise when attempts to organize aquaculture in groups do not take into account these pre-existing networks. Rights to land are also important. In the same way that introducing private property rights into a collectively oriented system can cause friction, attempting to develop collective aquaculture on land with individual ownership is likely to increase uncertainty over
the distribution of benefits.
2.3.2 Monitoring and Evaluation
Establishing clear objectives and appropriate target groups is closely associated with the definition of indicators for the monitoring and evaluation of aquaculture development activities. It is widely recognized that statistics documenting tons of fish produced or numbers of fish farmers are of limited value. There are problems in the quality and the validity of the data, and their relationship to wider objectives such as strengthened rural livelihoods is unclear. They say nothing about the disguised impacts of change. Nonetheless, there remains a need to find some way of assessing the value of development efforts. Those with responsibility for spending public money need to know that they are choosing the best option. This continues to present difficulties.
The problem of finding relevant and measurable indicators of project success and failure has arisen in numerous aquaculture projects, as in many other areas of rural development. In many aquaculture development projects in the past, where quantifiable goals were specified, two fundamental weaknesses appeared. First, the expected increases in yields and tons of fish produced tended to be over-optimistic. Objectives were then subsequently modified. Second, attention was seldom given to how such targets were related to broader nutritional or food security objectives. A common response was to set up ever-more sophisticated data bases. These were limited not only by the quality of the information entered (which was circumscribed by the capacity of the extension service to function as data collectors), but by sustainability on departure of donor assistance.
Nonetheless, a number of experts suggest that aquaculture data bases are an essential requisite to planning. Coche et al. (1994) argue that the quantification of the goals of a National Aquaculture Development Plan should be based on a good data base which provides a fairly accurate picture of natural and technical resources as well as a profile of social, economic and political aspects of the environment. These should be updated annually. The authors concede that collection of aquaculture data is problematic, especially in countries where extensive forms of aquaculture predominate. They point out that only two countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (Malawi and Nigeria) have a functional national statistical system.
Recently however, there has been a growing awareness of the need to combine quantitative indicators of success with more qualitative measures. These are often achieved with the use of participatory research techniques.
The ALCOM programme is innovative in a number of ways regarding indicators of success and failure in aquaculture development. It aims to explore the less visible aspects of aquaculture development (for example, by conducting studies on gender issues - Mbozi 1991). It also does not have any definite production targets. Instead impact is measured according to the adoption of methods, techniques and approaches by institutions and private individuals. Perhaps inevitably, the programme has been criticized for having little evidence of the production of fish.
ALCOM has repeatedly stressed that it is not a classic production-oriented development project. However, the overall (development) objective implies production: "...an increase in cash income and/or animal protein component in the diet of rural communities, achieved through increased production of fish from small-scale aquaculture integrated with mixed farming systems or as a complement or alternative to traditional small-scale fishing".
It is thus fairly easy for critics to claim that the causal link between the adoption of methods and the achievement of objectives is not proven.
ICLARM, both in Africa, and in Asia, has also been concerned with establishing appropriate indicators of success and failure in aquaculture development. In this case, the emphasis is on ascertaining the role of the fish pond within the farming system as a whole. Rather than concentrate on production of fish as such, ICLARM scientists stress the way that integrated resource management (including fish farming) can strengthen the overall system. Thus, the role of the pond as a source of irrigation or as a place to grow rice, may be equally important.
Studies have been conducted with farmers, using participatory methods, in order to find ways to evaluate integrated management. It is argued that any evaluation or monitoring programme will require full participation by the farmers in its design if it is to be effective (Lightfoot and Noble 1993). Farmers model their own farming systems and update them on a regular basis using a plan map of the farm. Resource flows are monitored and measured, initially in local terms, but later converted into estimates of (for example) kilos. In addition to information for researchers, it is argued that this approach also provides farmers with a tool for improving their decision making and skills in resource management. Four indicators have been suggested to evaluate both sustainability and economic performance. These are: species diversity, bioresource recycling, productive capacity of the natural resource base and economic efficiency (profit:cost ratios).
ICLARM scientists maintain that this approach to evaluation has the advantage that it also captures less easily quantified flows such as increased social linkages and reciprocation.
These indicators give important information at the level of the household. However, they would always need to be supplemented by further information in two other dimensions: the effects of fish farming adoption within the household, and the wider effects in the community. It is noted that establishing wider farmer participation requires effective linkages between government and non-government organizations, and a consideration of the political context. For example, the ICLARM work with farmers in Malawi covered only a very few selected people. There was not close work with the existing extension or an attempt to establish the results on a wider scale.
The AIT Aquaculture Outreach Project has as its key indicator of project success, the adoption and retention of project recommendations (Demaine et al. 1994). A baseline study of adopting farmers was conducted, and subsequent surveys carried out to monitor their progress. Although the adoption of technologies themselves is held to be important, of greater significance is the adoption of the principles behind them. For example, in achieving the principle of making the water green, farmers may use other combinations of resources than those recommended.
Lazard et al. (1991) also argue that project evaluations should privilege qualitative over quantitative criteria. The consolidation of aquaculture within overall rural development and viability after the departure of projects are more important than tons produced or numbers of producers. They argue that traditional measures of success such as internal rate of return, economic viability for the state and cost per kg of fish produced, should all be reconsidered. They add that evaluations are frequently constrained by the fact that they do not take full account of the diverse stakeholders involved in the project. If the evaluators are outsiders, they do not have an adequate understanding of the project context. If they are insiders, a biased picture may be presented. Therefore, evaluations should always comprise a combination of both outsiders and insiders in order to produce a balanced picture.
From the above, it is clear that different perspectives on monitoring and evaluation and on appropriate indicators, address varied objectives. These require clarification. Measuring the achievement of national objectives for aquaculture development is not the same as measuring project success or failure, which in turn is not necessarily the same as evaluating whether aquaculture itself is working. Even this is not synonymous with aquaculture as a means towards rural development.
There are overlapping elements in each - establishing fish fanning in rural communities independent of outside assistance is the most obvious. To a large extent, this can be measured through qualitative evidence of well-maintained ponds and quantitative data on factors such as the marketing of cultured fish and farmer-farmer supply of fingerlings. Examination of the less visible aspects of change requires participatory and qualitative studies (Harrison et al. 1994). These should identify likely positive and negative factors (eg. evidence of changing land values or changing availability of resources with alternative uses). Follow-up work would then be targeted to locally relevant issues.
The success or failure of aquaculture development projects and national plans are not only assessed by evidence of how people are farming fish. They also have objectives concerning institutional sustainability and the ability to provide certain inputs. Indicators of the achievement of such objectives include the existence of a functioning extension service and appropriate training. The institutional context for aquaculture development is the subject of the next section.
2.4 The Institutional Context
A key finding of the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture had been that projects were frequently hampered by a lack of government commitment and capacity. This was particularly acute in Sub-Saharan Africa, but the problem was also evident elsewhere. As a result it was suggested that detailed attention should be given to the recipient government's effective commitment to aquaculture.
Since then, there has been increasing recognition that focusing on the needs, motivations and constraints of the farmers in isolation is inadequate. It is equally important to take into account the institutional context. This includes the role and capacity of both government organizations and the private sector. The government context includes government authorities, research organizations and parastatals. The private sector includes non government organizations (national and international), farmers' organizations, private companies, and private producers.
The relationship between external donor and host institutions (usually government) is critical to the functioning of any development project. In the case of aquaculture, divergent expectations of the reasons for, and the means to achieve, aquaculture development often constrain projects (Harrison et al. 1994). The divergence occurs both in the higher echelons of planning and at the level of project implementation.
Harrison et al. (1994) argue that donor priorities are influenced by the need for accountability at home and the timely disbursement of funds. Issues which may appear important to donor organizations, such as careful beneficiary targeting or sensitivity to gender may appear less relevant to those who implement the project, whether expatriate advisers or local government personnel. Host governments may respond to opportunities for donor-funding and foreign exchange without the capacity to continue support. In turn, donors commit funding despite managerial and institutional weaknesses. Each stakeholder in the development process negotiates a position in relation to their own priorities.
This conclusion is supported by several recent studies. For example, Lazard et al. (1991), note that most current aquaculture development plans still reflect opportunism rather than any long term plan for the future. The authors suggest that diverse influences conspire to make projects overlook economic and political realities, both in their conception and in their implementation.
In the SIFR follow-up study (Coche et al. 1994), it is noted that the aquaculture sector generally receives very low priority from governments - a problem shared with the agriculture sector in general. A consequence of this low priority is a lack of development funds and a heavy reliance on external funding... "Such dependence implies that programmes and projects are often based on the priorities of donor agencies rather than on sectoral priorities as identified by national authorities." (Coche et al. 1994; 33)
In addition, in Sub-Saharan Africa the stability of the institutional framework has generally been poor. Administrative reorganizations have led to responsibility for aquaculture development changing from one ministry to another every few years. Furthermore, a tendency for countries to have more than one government department responsible for aquaculture development has led to confusion and sometimes competition for resources. Accompanying this is a lack of coordination between aquaculture development activities, so that responsibilities are dispersed and numerous conflicts arise. Even in places where there are national aquaculture development plans, these appear more as a catalogue of projects than coordinated and integrated programmes, linked to well defined policies.
These problems contribute to a conclusion which is strongly reminiscent of the Thematic Evaluation. Of 31 projects evaluated in the SIFR follow-up for Africa, almost half were judged to have had bad to limited sustainability. "The major reason for failures lies in the impossibility for the public administration to take over financial responsibilities after the foreign financial assistance has left" (Coche et al. 1994; 37)
The SIFR follow-up study for Latin America (AQUILA II 1994) found that of twenty countries studied, only four (Chile, Colombia, Cuba and Mexico) have a national plan for aquaculture development which is different from general fisheries policy papers. The relationship between research and production is frequently established without a central control by the administration. For extensive rural aquaculture, it is argued that because the most favourable prospects lie with small associations of producers, minimal government financing is entailed. On the other hand, governments will continue to have an important responsibility for creating the conditions favourable for the development of rural microeconomies.
The study notes that the region has no training courses for extensionists.
The ALCOM project has also stressed the key role of the institutional context in support to aquaculture development. The Working Group on the Future of ALCOM identified four priority areas for support to aquaculture development over the next ten years. One of these was "strengthening of aquaculture institutions" (ALCOM 1994; 24). Two assumptions guide the strategy: first that government institutions will, for the foreseeable future, work with limited resources; second, that increased collaboration between governments, NGOs and the private sector is the best way to use scarce resources.
Accordingly, a number of ways of strengthening institutions are outlined. There is a need to train senior government officers in aspects of planning in order for countries to produce comprehensive sectoral development plans, and to be competent in project formulation and management. Support for better documentation and information facilities is needed, as is action to strengthen research. Importantly, the Programme stresses the need to improve the delivery of extension methods and institutional support. Extension services are usually poorly resourced and extensionists limited in their capacity to do their jobs. They need skills in development support beside technical competence and thus require further training. In addition, it is suggested that collaboration between government authorities (such as fisheries and agriculture) could extend extension coverage and impact. Lastly, the private sector should be stimulated to take up extension functions. These points are elaborated
below.
2.4.1 The Provision of Inputs
Since the Thematic Evaluation of aquaculture, the accepted view of the appropriate role of aquaculture promoters has changed. In common with many development interventions, the search for sustainability has led to a change in focus: from the provision of tangible inputs to capacity building. Many fish fanning development projects had worked with the assumption that the government or project has a responsibility to provide certain inputs. Most frequently this referred to fingerlings - produced and distributed by the government. It also extended to pond inputs, feeds, tools, and credit. The long term viability of the provision of certain sorts of inputs, particularly those which can be construed as incentives, is increasingly questioned.
Fingerlings
Regarding fingerlings, the cost of constructing and maintaining the required facilities (hatcheries, transport) is considered to be prohibitive. The evidence of partially or non-functioning government fish farming stations in Africa and Latin America is testament to the weakness of the strategy (Coche et al. 1994). It is also now recognized that such an approach inhibits farmer-farmer supply and creates dependency.
Harrison et al. (1994) found that in Luapula Province, Zambia, the government attempts to supply fingerlings from two government fish farms. It is impossible to meet expressed demand because of technical difficulties at the government farms and a lack of transport. Farmers believe they should be supplied with subsidized fingerlings, which inhibits the development of a private market. Similarly, in the Central African Republic, the fact that people were used to free goods was cited as an important reason for people giving up fish farming (Moehl 1989). These findings have led to a search for more sustainable ways of ensuring fingerling supply (see below)
Credit
The appropriacy and necessity of the provision of credit for small-scale rural aquaculture development is widely debated. Lack of access to capital has been cited as a serious constraint for potential adopters (Librero 1987, Drewes 1988, Mashapa and Motobo 1988). However, by its nature, small-scale aquaculture requires inputs which are generally available on-farm. The need for credit is therefore minimal in most cases.
Credit may be useful to assist particular categories of producers faced with particular constraints (such as pond construction for women farmers). It may also play a role in increasing production inputs among farmers with an established knowledge base and guaranteed marketing opportunities. However, Harrison et al. (1994) argue for caution in embarking on credit programmes. Not only are there numerous practical problems in implementation, but credit can easily become a tool to be manipulated by those who have least need of it.
For example, in Luapula Province, Zambia, very few farmers receive credit for fish fanning. Those that do are larger scale farmers who have used the money for pond construction and then run into serious repayment problems following technical difficulties. When a number of small-scale farmers applied for loans to expand their pond area, ability to repay was completely unrelated to the size of the loan. Demands for loans are prevalent because a combination of low real interest rates and a history of non-repayment make loans more like grants in the view of farmers. At the same time, loan acquisition procedures are sufficiently complicated to ensure that only the slighter better educated (and also better-off) apply.
There are two key points often overlooked in credit schemes for small-scale fish farming. First, those taking advantage of the loans and training should be those who manage the ponds. This is often overlooked in gender-blind planning. In many cases the wives of male pond owners do the bulk of pond management, but less frequently benefit from loans or training opportunities. Second, beneficiaries from schemes are mainly those who are adept at claiming resources rather than those who need the inputs. Provision should be made to assess both capability and need.
Box 3: Credit Scheme in the Lake Basin Area, Kenya
The FAO supported project "Development of Fish Farming in the Lake Basin Area, Kenya" has introduced a credit scheme. The project has been running in various phases since 1982. In earlier years the scheme was unsuccessful. Cash was given for inputs which were not forthcoming, loans were not repaid, large amounts of money and time were spent on only a few credit farmers.
A revitalized scheme now focuses on credit in kind. No cash is given. Loans enable farmers to buy fingerlings from the fry production centers and feeds such as rice and wheat bran from local stockists in order to increase productivity. Interest is charged at 18% with a 10% charge for overheads. It is charged from the day of first stocking and first repayments are expected eight months from stocking.
There is a minimum requirement that credit farmers should have existing ponds of at least 300m^2. They are selected by extensionists. The prospects for the scheme generally seem good, because many of the pitfalls of earlier approaches have been overcome. It has a wide impact, and farmers are not given a false cash incentive to join.
There are, however, a number of reasons for caution.
* A drive to enlist as many credit recipients as possible has led to the recruitment of some farmers who have inadequate ponds (size and quality) and knowledge level. Furthermore, their conception of interest repayment and obligations is sketchy.
* Little attention has been given to the needs of those receiving credit. As a result, in some areas, farmers with an unusually high socio-economic status (retired civil servants etc.) have been enlisted. There is a possibility that ordinary farmers will feel the example is simply not relevant to them. As an aspect of me scheme is that credit recipients should now be the focus of extension visits, in addition to credit funds being possibly misplaced, scarce extension capability may be disproportionately directed to those who may need it less.
Coche et al. (1994) note that the need for credit for small-scale farmers was ranked very high in national studies. They point out though, that on the basis of numerous negative experiences in the past, it is unlikely that the commercial banking community will be prepared to provide small-scale credit in the near future.
2.4.2 The Role of the Private Sector
Reduction in official provision of inputs and services and an increased role for the private sector are obviously two sides of the same coin. Privatization of as much of the production process as possible is a central theme in most recent writing on small-scale aquaculture development.
For example, with fingerling supply, attempts are now being made to increase the knowledge and capacity of private fingerling producers. In many places, farmer knowledge of techniques of fry production is limited, resulting in gradual reductions in the quality of fingerlings produced. Development of farmer-farmer fingerling supply therefore requires an improvement and consolidation of this knowledge. Examples exist in Madagascar and Kenya (see box 4 and 5), where the aim is that, through training farmers, these can eventually overcome shortages of extension.
Box 4: Privatization of Fingerling Production in Madagascar
In Madagascar, a UNDP/FAO project, in collaboration with the government, is helping to set up private fingerling producers. This has a knock-on effect of privatizing extension in many rural areas.
Private fingerling producers are identified and trained by the project. They are supplied with technical advice. Extension and marketing tools such as pamphlets and technical posters are available to fingerling producers at cost Other needs such as nets and tools are purchased through a credit scheme in collaboration with a local bank.
Because the possession of a suitable site is an important criterion, this tends to favour larger farmers. However, the farmers are spread widely: in order to minimize competition a minimum distance of 20 km is set between one fingerling producer and the next.
By mid 1993, the project had over 90 private fingerling producers with a total of about 20,000 customers.
It is suggested that the effective privatization of the extension service allows the Department; of Fisheries to focus on neglected issues such as staff training, broodstock selection, and applied research.
Source: Jensen et al. 1994
Box 5: Approaches to Fingerling Supply in the Lake Basin Area
In the Lake Basin Area of Kenya, the government and FAO/UNDP project have in the past attempted to supply subsidized fingerlings to all farmers with limited success. Both production of fingerlings and distribution were inadequate and costly. The Lake Basin project is now making a serious attempt to move away from this approach to fingerling supply.
There has been a change in direction with support and encouragement to the private sector. Farmers have been trained in fingerling production and supplied with nets and fish cans at the same loan conditions as other credit farmers. It is intended mat fry production centers (FPCs) will remain a source of genetically sound tilapia for distribution to private fingerling producers.
As demand for tilapia fingerlings from the fry production centers is reducing, emphasis has changed to the production of catfish fingerlings. It is intended that sales of these should ensure me economic viability of the FPCs.
Source: Harrison 1993b
The Working Group on the Future of ALCOM (ALCOM 1994), also stresses the potential of the stimulation of the private sector to take up extension functions. It is argued that producers of fingerlings, feed and fertilizers could undertake extension as part of their marketing strategies. Coche et al. (1994) found that among the important development priorities for Sub-Saharan African aquaculture, privatization of fingerling production, was rated very highly: "It becomes more and more evident that the best chances of success lie in the development of a private sector, economically sound and technically independent from government support for most of its regular needs" (Coche et al. 1994,50)
Lazard et al. (1991), however, advise caution in the approach taken to privatization. Privatization is not a simple solution because the private sector is made up of a diverse range of individuals and associations with different motivations and potentials. As they point out, nearly all fish farmers are already private operators. The outcome of the reduction of state functions will depend not only on the viability of existing production systems, but on the nature of the operators who undertake activities previously under government control. For example, the new entrepreneurs are often ex-civil servants and politicians. This may have the advantage of raising the political profile of fish farming but may bear little relationship to initial objectives of aquaculture promotion such as improved food security. Nonetheless, the authors conclude that some form of privatization is necessary, in order to strengthen the economic base.
An alternative to the support of private individuals is that of working with NGOs. This term covers a wide variety of organizations, from local small-scale associations of producers, to large international donors such as OXFAM. This option is held to be particularly promising for Latin America (AQUILA II 1994a). It has been argued (e.g. Fowler 1988) that NGO intervention may be more effective than that of states because of their closer relations with the local people, and their more flexible structure and functioning. However, this comparative advantage is only potential. In practice, many NGOs fail to achieve the participation and flexibility promised. They may be constrained by government authorities by financial and infrastructural difficulties, or may become dominated by elites, and fail to ensure the full participation of intended beneficiaries (Harrison 1994).
2.5 Aquaculture as Farming
The Thematic Evaluation had noted that, given institutional weaknesses, there was a potential for an increasing amount of extension for aquaculture to take place via agricultural extension. Since then, a growing awareness of the closer association of small-scale aquaculture with farming than with fishing has led to widespread calls for institutional recognition of the fact.
In anglophone Africa extension services for aquaculture are mostly located within Fisheries Departments, within Agricultural or Natural Resources Ministries. In francophone areas, they are most often under Ministères des Eaux et Forêts. Such extension services are usually specialized and restricted to aquaculture. Any cooperation with agricultural extension is ad hoc, Zimbabwe being a notable exception. In Latin America, a similar situation prevails. According to a 1989 report, only in Panama are aquaculture specialists made available to the agricultural extensionists who often have more operational resources with which to reach the farmers (Noriega Curtis et al. 1989). This institutional arrangement is thought to be the reason why small-scale rural aquaculture in Panama has been far more successful than in most other countries in the region.
Extension services were mainly created during the 1970s with the assistance of technical assistance projects. They were seldom adequately resourced in terms of either personnel or operating facilities. During the 1980s, especially with the influence of structural adjustment programmes, this situation has become much worse. Although agricultural extension services also suffer from weaknesses in terms of personnel and operating facilities, they are generally much better resourced than those for aquaculture. As fish cultured by small-scale farmers should be seen as one crop among many, it makes sense for extensionists to be able to advise farmers within the context of all of their other activities.
Variations of this suggestion are evident in most recent literature. COPESCAL (1991) note that one of the major limitations for Latin American aquaculture development is the idea that it is an isolated activity, not integrated to agriculture and to rural development as a whole. It is argued that, as aquaculture is physically integrated with other farming activities... "one would hope that at an institutional level there would also be mechanisms for making this integration possible" (COPESCAL 1991; 7).
Lazard et al. (1991), conclude that because fish farming is a productive agricultural activity, it is less appropriate for it to be placed within an institutional context of natural resource management.
Coche et al. (1994) also state that there is a need to integrate the functions of the specialized aquaculture extension service into the agricultural extension service, to be supported by a few aquaculture specialists. They argue that such integration offers several advantages: agricultural extension is usually nationwide and well-known by farmer, it has common interests with fish farming in terms of livestock, feed ingredients sources and use, and target groups are common. Obviously successful integration rests not only on the operational effectiveness of agricultural extension, but on the ability of different departments to cooperate.
The ALCOM programme has come to similar conclusions, and begun to put them into practice. The limited likelihood of expansion of aquaculture institutions means that they need to find ways to increase their impact with limited resources... "The attempt to engage agriculture extension systems in aquaculture is one such step" (ALCOM 1994; 7).
Box 6: New Approaches to Aquaculture Extension in Zambia
ALCOM, recognizing the poor prospects of operating an extension service specifically for aquaculture, has found alternative approaches in both Zambia and Mozambique.
In Zambia, resources for agricultural extension are much more widespread man they are for aquaculture. In addition, most aquaculture is practiced as an addition to farming rather than a part of fishing activities.
In Zambia, the National Extension Action Plan is supported by a World Bank supported project, Zambia Agricultural Research and Extension Project (ZAREP). The Bank explicitly recommended that aquaculture be covered within ZAREP as a specialized crop, and has supported the ALCOM pilot project in this respect
The aim is that fish farming specialists are assigned to the agriculture extension system, strengthening and consolidating knowledge.
There are constraints. These are mainly institutional. Problems of overworked and underpaid field staff still persist, and collaboration between departments is uneven. Resources for extension at me field level are remain limited
The integration of agricultural and aquacultural extension is unlikely to be appropriate in all contexts, and the form it will take depends on a range of considerations, from the type of aquaculture practiced, to the existing institutional context. Pressure from donors for such integration is also likely to encounter resistance at some levels. In an economic climate in which different government departments find themselves competing for scarce funds, it is in the interest of officers in fisheries departments to maintain a separate aquaculture extension service, requiring a separate financing. Reformulation of institutional arrangements in the context of repeatedly cut budgets may be perceived as yet another way of reducing these budgets, and therefore resisted. Recognition of the vital role of fish culture specialists as expert advisers to agricultural extensionists is one way of building collaboration.
For international donors too, questions are being asked about the institutional place of small-scale rural aquaculture. Suggestions for institutional changes at the country level have a range of possible implications. Support for aquaculture has always been based within Fisheries Departments. This clearly makes sense for many kinds of aquacultural production, particularly coastal and industrial scale aquaculture. However, for small-scale rural aquaculture, expertise in technical aspects of fisheries is only one necessary factor for effective promotion. Knowledge of wider issues in rural development is also vital. For practical reasons, it is unlikely that responsibility for rural aquaculture will be substantially shifted. Apart from anything else, the problems of defining rural aquaculture and trying to delineate this from other forms would persist. However, recognition of the place of small-scale rural aquaculture within rural development should lead to more effective
collaboration between fisheries and other relevant departments.
2.6 Research and Development Linkages
SIFR and its follow-up studies has made an important contribution to understanding research capabilities and priorities in small-scale rural aquaculture. However, concern has been expressed both within SIFR and elsewhere that the relationship between research and development activities needs much more elaboration than has taken place so far. There remains a tendency for researchers to concentrate on their technical specialization, regardless of its appropriacy or relevance or development needs. Furthermore, past research is not adequately taken into account when defining research programmes for the future. The wheel is reinvented.
In the SIFR follow-up study for Sub-Saharan Africa (Coche et al. 1994), a principal finding was that there is a definite need for improving the coordination between research and development, as well as a better system for using research as a support for development. In most countries the collaboration between aquaculture research and development sectors could be much stronger. Furthermore, only a limited number of the constraints to small-scale rural aquaculture development can be resolved through research. The major identified constraints which could be alleviated with research are:
· A lack of reliable production statistics;
· Sound economic data for private entrepreneurs
· Village socio-economics poorly understood
· Lack of juvenile fish for pond restocking.
· Broodstock degeneration
· Indigenous species not well known
· Good-growing indigenous species not available
According to the authors, all other identified constraints cannot be alleviated by research. Clearly, even the alleviation of the above constraints requires that research takes place in an institutional context which is supportive.
Main development priorities are principally of a non-technical nature. They relate to public administration, education and training, socio-economics, infrastructure, extension, and private sector development. However, major identified research priorities are biotechnological in nature. Coche et al. suggest that additional research priorities could be considered for example, information for credit.
Lazard et al. (1991) also argue that in Africa, the bulk of research carried out is not directly related to development activities. Part of the blame is attributed to the fact that researchers want to do "fundamental" research from which they will gain scientific recognition, rather than applied research. They add that there are pressures for development organizations to get their projects underway without undue delay for the collection of data, whether socio-economic, or bio-technical.
One option for improving the effectiveness and relevance of research is to adopt new approaches which have gained currency in other aspects of rural development. These are the subject of the concluding section, below.
3. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR SMALL-SCALE RURAL AQUACULTURE
3.1 Technical Breakthroughs: GIS
3.2 The Idea of Participation
3.3 Concluding Comments
3.1 Technical Breakthroughs: GIS
Geographical information systems (GIS) technology has recently been adapted to assess the potential for aquaculture development. A GIS is a computerized way of storing, manipulating and analyzing data. In the case of aquaculture, the potential of a particular area can be assessed according to a number of different criteria. These include the availability of surface water, the suitability of the topography for pond construction, the suitability of soil texture, the appropriate temperature, the availability of agricultural by-products, infrastructure and marketing potential.
The FAO has carried out a study of the potential for warm water aquaculture in Africa (Kapetsky 1994). A detailed study of potential in Ghana has been followed by an assessment of potential throughout the continent, and the compilation of a data base of about 1,000 small water bodies. The idea is to compare potential with actual performance, in order to be able to focus assistance on areas which are not living up to expectations. Early results indicate that there are 29 countries in Africa with suitable to optimum conditions for fish farming.
GIS has a potential for simplifying planning and decision making for aquaculture. A large number of variables can be stored and analyzed using one system. However, potential for aquaculture development is obviously determined by a much wider range of criteria than currently manipulated through GIS. Although, economic and marketing criteria are considered, the political and administrative contexts are currently not part of the analysis. The usefulness of GIS is therefore limited by the extent to which these factors intervene in the process of aquaculture development.
3.2 The Idea of Participation
While most experts promoting aquaculture have a well-developed knowledge about the influence of technical constraints such as the role of water supply, soil quality or fish diseases, there is still ignorance about a range of social and economic factors. The gap has been partially filled by the kind of research described in part two, above. However, there is still a need for better understanding of the communities into which small-scale rural aquaculture is introduced. At the same time, doubts have arisen about the value and usefulness of conventional questionnaire survey approaches to research. Not only is the data collected often of dubious value, but a failure to involve local people in the establishment of agendas has been criticized.
In other aspects of rural development a response to these concerns has been the development of participatory approaches to both research and intervention. Since at least the early eighties, top-down approaches have been criticized for their refusal to see all stakeholders as active participants in development. Technologies are developed in isolation from those who are expected to benefit from them and are imposed from outside without due consideration of existing knowledge and practices. The response has taken various forms, but broadly has become known as "farmer first". The justification for the shift is both moral and instrumental. People should be able to define their own objectives and agendas and development projects are likely to be more sustainable and effective: "With farmer first, the main objective is not to transfer known technology, but to empower farmers to learn, to adapt and to do better; analysis is not by outsiders - but by farmers and by farmers assisted
by outsiders" (Chambers 1989; 182)
The moral aspect of the shift involves a call for "reversals" - in attitudes, in professionalism, and in the top-down biases of development practice. It reflects a disenchantment with conventional approaches to development which had clearly failed in their major goal - the alleviation of poverty. Thus in order to introduce any significant change in the way development takes place, the behaviour and attitudes of outsiders have to change significantly.
The instrumental aspect has involved a search for ways to make development more effective. This has included the development of a diverse range of approaches. Some of the most popular are agroecosystem analysis (AEA), farmer participatory research (FPR), participatory action research (PAR), fanning systems research (FSR), rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal (PRA). The diversity disguises a number of similarities in the mechanics of data collection and information exchange (the methods). These similarities are in turn not necessarily closely related to the rationales and approaches behind data collection (the methodologies). Some examples are discussed below in relation to aquaculture development.
FSR sees the farm as an integrated whole. The aim is to facilitate a process whereby farmers are able to select and develop new technologies. There is explicit recognition of the value of existing knowledge. However, critics suggest that more often than not, a system is imputed to farmers' activities where none actually exists (Fairhead 1992, Richards 1989). What researchers see as an experiment may be viewed differently by farmers.
The thinking behind both PRA and RRA is that not only should all people's voices be heard, but that the processes are themselves empowering. They are able to "do their own analysis, to take command, to gain confidence, and to make their own decisions" (Chambers 1992;2). RRA is essentially a forerunner to PRA. Early emphasis was on the effectiveness and rapidity of gaining information from people, through a series of tools: ranking and scoring exercises, diagramming, transect walks, group discussion and mapping. Recently, RRA has been modified and to some extent reincarnated with a new label: PRA. Many of the same or similar techniques and tools are used (see box 7), but there is a greater emphasis on empowerment rather than simply the extraction of information. Rapidity is less important than the quality of the participation. The tools are not pre-defined methods to be implemented. They are intended to initiate a process from which outsiders stand back and local people take
an active and dominant role.
Box 7: Methods used in PRA and RRA
(Adapted from Cornwall et al. 1994)
Visualized analyses
Interviewing
Group and team dynamics
- Participatory mapping and modelling
- Aerial photograph analyses
- Seasonal calendars
- Daily and activity profiles
- Historical profiles and trend analyses
- Timelines and chronologies
- Matrix scoring
- Preference ranking
- Venn and network diagramming
- Systems and flow diagrams
- Pie diagrams
- Semi-structured interviewing
- Transect and group walks
- Wealth ranking
- Focus group interviews
- Key informant interviews
- Ethno-histories
-Team contracts
- Rapid report writing
- Villager and shared presentations
- Self-corrected notes; and diaries
The application of more participatory approaches such as PRA and FSR to small-scale rural aquaculture is relatively recent. By nature the approaches are not technology or product focused - they are about finding appropriate technologies rather than promoting one in particular. As a result, they have been less welcomed by institutions with have a primarily single product focus (such as fish). ICLARM, as a member of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), has pioneered work on integrated resource management which includes fish ponds in the farming system (see below). Others (e.g. Molnar 1987, Chong et al. 1984) have discussed the applicability of FSR to aquaculture. Molnar points out a fundamental problem in the use of FSR for a crop which may be completely new to the farmers. Clearly, the absence of a local fish farming tradition may limit the usefulness of FSR due to a lack of local technologies to be modified.
"an on-farm research program must begin with fundamental instruction in the concept offish as a crop, management of the aquatic environment in terms of food, oxygen and water quality requirements, and the nature of aquatic reproductive processes" (Molnar et al. 1987).
ICLARM scientists, in their work in Asia and Africa, have a farming systems perspective on research and development. However, they stress a distance between their approach and that of commodity-focused on-farm experimentation (Lightfoot and Noble 1993). In the past, many experiments might have been conducted by farmers, but relatively few were designed and tested by them. The ICLARM approach is that, by working in close participation with farmers, the farmers themselves establish and develop their own agendas. The aim is to facilitate farmers' holistic appreciation of their environment and the potential to integrate its elements and incorporate new ones.
A first step in this work is often the establishment of local systems of resource classification at the level of the community. The idea is that farmers visualize their whole farming system and the interrelationships of its elements. Working with groups of up to twenty farmers, a common method used is participatory mapping and diagramming. This is usually done using locally available materials and terminology for different kinds of resources. Ideally, a wide range of members of the community can participate because drawing does not require literacy. For the farmers, their environment is visualized in a way that may be new. For the researcher, the mapping provides a detailed picture of land, water and soil distribution from the perspective of the local community.
Following from this community mapping, individual farmers may choose to make similar drawing for their own farms. Such drawings cover both natural resources and on and off-farm enterprises. To encapsulate seasonal change, they may be repeated at different times of the year. According to ICLARM scientists, such diagrams can provide a basis for further research and be used as the basis for suggestions of improved integrated resources management: "In this way, research agendas can be developed through mutual cooperation between farmer and researcher" (Lightfoot and Noble 1993).
Box 8: ICLARM's Africa Project
Since, 1986, ICLARM has supported a project based in Domasi, Malawi. The project involves participatory research with farmers, the training of scientists at the National Aquaculture Center (NAC), and demonstrations to farmers at the NAC.
Following a demonstration of rice-fish culture, a number of farmers experimented with the techniques demonstrated, creating rice-fish systems adapted to the specifics of their own farm and resource base.
Evidence from ICLARM trials suggest that at the level of me household, improved integrated resource management with fish fanning can result in significant benefits. These include far more than the production offish: the pond also plays an important role in irrigation of crops, in water storage, and for household use.
The ALCOM project has also experimented with participatory approaches to development, particularly RRA. In Zimbabwe, an RRA was applied to three proposed ALCOM activities on small water body utilization. A team of investigators was selected and over a week in each area, they were trained, carried out a number of activities with the communities, synthesized and reported back on their findings. The teams of investigators comprised international staff from ALCOM, experts from national-level institutions, officers from district-level agencies and field-workers from both the communities being investigated and neighbouring areas (Townsley 1992). ALCOM believes that the diverse composition of the team was a key contributor to the success of the exercise. It brought together not only a variety of disciplines, but a range of people who would be working on any activities which the appraisal ended up recommending.
The participatory nature of the exercise was also important. It would be possible to carry out an appraisal with full consultation of the local people, and therefore detailed and accurate. However, if this was then simply taken back to the office, it would have only partially fulfilled its purpose. The end-of-appraisal meeting with the local communities was vital:
"Here, after the appraisal team had "presented" their findings, they played just a marginal role in the rest of the proceedings. The protagonists were now the local people and local administrators, exchanging ideas and opinions, often disagreeing but talking issues out until a consensus was reached" (Townsley 1992;12)
Participatory approaches, and PRA in particular, have their critics. Recognition that PRA is more than a technical approach, and that if carried to its logical extreme has political implications which are unacceptable to many, can result in resistance. Participation is associated with independent decisions and self-determination. These are not in the interests of everyone. Furthermore, the demands for flexibility and adaptability are difficult to meet for organizations which have more blueprint and restrictive traditions of development planning.
On the other hand, it is fairly easy for organizations to apparently adopt participatory approaches with little effective commitment. As Cernea points out, appearances may deceive:
"We hear sudden declarations of fashionable support for participatory approaches....social scientists should not confuse these statements with actual participatory planning, because under the cloud of cosmetic rhetoric, technocratic planning continues to rule" (Cernea 1991)
Associated with this is a tension between the well argued moral and practical appropriacy of avoiding top-down, non participatory research and intervention, and the problem that exists in giving meaningful content to that participation. The notion of allowing people to define their needs is weakened by the fact that it is impossible to ignore that a relatively powerful group or individual is in the position of choosing to allow something. The issues that people are supposed to participate in are defined in advance. Defining what are or are not appropriate as needs is necessarily value-laden. People in positions of power are able to make choices in such definitions. Under such circumstances, participation really is little more than a tool for developers. As Gatter puts it:
"Though in the 1980s, institutions have become increasingly enamoured with the rhetoric of participation and bottom-up development, what often passes for allowing people to articulate their needs is really a case of teaching them to do it" (Gatter 1990; 433)
Participatory approaches also tend to overlook questions of power and conflict within communities. They are ill equipped to deal with the fact that rural communities are not homogeneous, with mutually compatible interests. Differences occur with respect to age, gender, wealth, and ethnicity. The apparent consensus reached by participatory approaches may in fact just be an expression of the, dominant view. The suppression of conflicts arising from the decision to listen to one voice rather than another is not easy to identify.
Attempts to address the apparent naiveity of the "Farmer First" literature have recently been made (Scoones and Thompson 1994; Davies 1994; Long et al. 1992). They try to incorporate an understanding of the way that knowledge is the product of the interaction of unequally powerful actors. Equally, the stress is gradually shifting from a focus only on farmers, to critical issues of institutional change. Merely adopting the forms of participatory approaches without addressing the structures and approaches accompanying them is inadequate.
3.3 Concluding Comments
A wide range of questions for the future of small-scale aquaculture development have been raised. They range in complexity from pragmatic questions about the way to organize extension, to even less straightforward issues of institutional approaches, and decisions about how to link means with objectives. Answers depend on the political and institutional perspective of the respondent.
For donors concerned with the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture, there is a need to identify which are the critical questions and what the practical implications of specific responses are. However, many of these questions have been taxing rural development planners for some time. They do not have easy answers. From the discussion so far, a number of key questions can be pinpointed:
· The duration of projects. There is now a consensus that most assistance has taken too short-term a view of the prospects for aquaculture development, and that support funds need to be committed over a much longer period of time. Results cannot be expected immediately. But is the donor community prepared or in a position to wait for the kind of time period needed?
· The role of the private sector. Mounting interest in a greater role for the private sector leads to questions about how this takes place in practice. Which elements of the private sector should donors work with and how? How can the relationship between government and non-government organizations be most constructively developed?
· The institutional location. Should attempts be made to transfer as much as possible of the responsibility for small-scale aquaculture development from fisheries to agricultural departments? How would this work in practice?
· Target groups and objectives. If decisions are made to work with one group of farmers rather than another because of their better chances for sustained management, what are the implications for meeting livelihood enhancement objectives? How might this be measured?
· Learning from successes. In places with no tradition of small-scale aquaculture, a consolidation of practices is beginning to take place. Small-scale aquaculture becomes a part of rural livelihoods regardless of external intervention. To what extent are these successes replicable? What are the factors which may impede replicability?
REFERENCES *
* Apart from the layout, the references are as presented by the author
AIT (Asian Institute of Technology), 1994. Partners in Development: The Promotion of Sustainable Aquaculture; AIT
ALCOM 1994. Aquaculture into the 21st Century in Southern Africa: Report Prepared by the Working Group on the Future of ALCOM; ALCOM report no. 15; FAO
AQUILA II 1994a. Diagnostico sobre el Estado de la Acuicultura en América Latina y el Caribe; AQUILA II Documento de Campo. No. 11
AQUILA II 1994b. Resultados y Recomendaciones del Proyecto Informe final; FAO, Proyecto AQUILA II, 88p
Balarin, J.D. 1988b. Systems in Use and Species Cultivated. (eds.) King H and Ibrahim K, Village Level Aquaculture Development In Africa. Proceedings of the Commonwealth Consultative Workshop On Village Level Aquaculture Development In Africa, Freetown, Sierra Leone, 14-20 February 1985, Commonwealth Secretariat, London, pp 3-24.
Ben-Yami, M. 1986. 'Aquaculture: The Importance of Knowing its Limitations' Ceres, 112, pp 15-18.
De Campos Guimaraes, J.P. 1989 'Shrimp Culture and Market Incorporation: A Study of Shrimp Culture in Paddy Fields in Southwest Bangladesh'. Development and Change, Vol. 20, pp 653-682.
Cernea, M. 1991. Putting People First: Sociological Variables in Rural Development; World Bank; Washington
Chambers, R. 1989. 'Reversals, institutions and change', in (eds.) Chambers R, Pacey A, and Thrupp L, Farmer First: Farmer Innovation in Agricultural Research; Intermediate Technology Publications; London
Chambers, R. 1992. 'Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed and Participatory', IDS Discussion paper, no. 311; Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex
Chong, K.C., Lizarondo, M., De la Cruz, Z., Guerrero, C. And Smith, I. 1984. Milkfish production dualism in the Philippines: A multidisciplinary perspective on continuous low yields and constraints to aquaculture development. ICLARM Technical reports No. 15, FAO and ICLARM.
Coche, A., B. Haight, M. Vincke. 1994. Aquaculture Development and Research in Sub-Saharan Africa; CIFA Technical Paper, no. 23, FAO.
COPESCAL 1991, Development of rural aquaculture. Subject 5a of provisional agenda of the 6th session of the Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America, Lima, Peru.
Cornwall, A., I. Guijt, A. Welbourn. 1994. Acknowledging Process: Methodological Challenges for Agricultural Research and Extension; in (eds.) Scoones I and Thompson J, Beyond Farmer First. Rural People's Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension Practice; Intermediate Technology Publications, London.
Davies, S. 1994 (ed), IDS Bulletin, Vol. 25, No. 2
Demaine, H. 1994. 'Adoption and Retention of Project Recommendations; Results of the 1993 Survey; AIT Aquaculture Outreach Programme, Working Paper No. 32
Drewes, E. 1988. 'Socio-Economic Aspects'. ALCOM, Socio-Cultural, Socio Economic, Bio-Environmental, and Bio-Technical Aspects of Aquaculture in Rural Development. Reports prepared for the Aquaculture For Local Community Development Programme, FI: GCP/INT/436/SWE.1, FAO, Rome.
FAO, UNDP, NORAD. 1987. Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture; FAO, Rome.
FAO 1995a. Aquaculture Production 1986-1992; Fisheries Circular No. 815, Rev 6
FAO 1995b. Review of the State of World Fisheries Resources: Aquaculture; Fisheries Circular No. 886
Fairhead, J. 1993. Representing knowledge: the 'new farmer' in research. In Pottier, J (ed) Practicing Development: Social Science Perspectives; Routledge, London
Fowler, A. 1988. Non Governmental Organizations in Africa: Achieving Comparative Advantage in Relief and Micro-Development. IDS Discussion Paper, No. 249. Institute of Development Studies, Brighton.
Gatter, P. 1990. Indigenous and Institutional Thought in the Practice of Rural Development: A Study of an Ushi Chiefdom in Luapula, Zambia; Ph.D. Thesis, University of London.
Grover, J.H., D. Street and P. Starr. 1980. Review of Aquaculture Development Activities In Central and West Africa. International Center for Aquaculture, Auburn University. Research and Development Series, No. 28, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama.
Hannig, W. 1988. Towards a Blue Revolution: Socio-Economics of Brackishwater Pond Cultivation In Java. Gadjah Mada University Press, Yogakarta, Indonesia.
Harrison, E. 1993a. "My Pond has no Fish": Aquaculture Development in Luapula Province, Zambia; University of Sussex, Brighton.
Harrison, E. 1993b. 'Fish Farming in the Lake Basin, Kenya', University of Sussex, Brighton
Harrison, E. 1994. 'Aquaculture in Africa, Socio-Economic Dimensions'; Recent Advances in Aquaculture, Vol. V.
Harrison, E., J. Muir, R. Stirrat, A. Stewart. 1994. Fish Farming in Africa: What's The Catch? University of Sussex, Brighton.
Jensen A., Van den Berg F., Janssen J. 1994. Privatization of rural extension - is it possible?. ALCOM News, Issue 13.
Kapetsky, J.M. 1994. A strategic assessment of warm-water fish farming potential in Africa. CIFA Technical Paper, No. 27. 67p.
Lazard, J., Y. Lemcomte, B. Stomal, J.Y. Weigel. 1991. Pisciculture en Afrique Subsaharienne: Situations et Projets dans les Pays Francophones, Propositions d'Action: Ministère de la Coopération et de Développement, France.
L'Heureux, R., Moehl J., Yte Wingbe. 1990. République de Côte d'Ivoire: Développement de la Pisciculture en Milieu rural. Rapport d'Evaluation Final De Projet; FAO, Rome. Projet UNDP/FAO IVC/87/001
Librero, A. 1987. Women's Roles in Institution and Credit. (eds.) Nash C, C Engle and D Crosetti. Women in Aquaculture. Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture., FAO, Rome, ADCP/REP/87/28. pp 83-90.
Lightfoot, C. and Pullin, R. 1994. Why an Integrated Resource Management Approach?, in (ed) R. Brummett, Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in Sub-Saharan Africa. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 46.
Lightfoot, C. and Noble, R. 1993, A Participatory Experiment in Sustainable Agriculture; Journal for Farming Systems Research-Extension, Vol. 4, No. 1
Long, N. and Long, A. (eds.), 1992. Battlefields of Knowledge: The Interlocking of Theory and Practice in Social Research and Development; Routledge, London
Maar, A., M. Mortimer, I. Van der Lingen. 1966. Fish Culture in Central East Africa. FAO, Rome. 158 pp.
Mashapha, S. and T. Matobo. 1988. Aquaculture and Rural Development in Lesotho. ALCOM. Technical Consultation on Aquaculture in Rural Development, Lusaka, 27-30 Oct. 1987., FAO, Rome. GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP/2
Martinez-Espinosa, M. 1994. Entre la Acuicultura de los "Mas Pobres" y de la "Menos Pobres'", Proyecto FAO AQUILA II, Documento de Campo, No. 21
Mbozi, E. 1991. The Integration of Gender Issues in Fish Fanning in Chibote Area, Luapula Province, Zambia. ALCOM
Moehl, J. 1989. Consolidation et Réorientation du Programme de Vulgarisation Piscicole en République Centrafricaine. FAO, Rome, FI:DP/CAF/85/004.
Molnar, J., B. Duncan, L. Upton Hatch. 1987. Fish in the Farming System: Applying the FSR Approach to Aquaculture. Research in Rural Sociology and Development, Vol. 3, pp 169-193.
Murnyak D. and M. 1988. Fish Farming within the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Tanzania Diocese in Arusha Region. Paper to National Seminar on Fisheries Policy and Planning, University of Dar es Salaam, 2-4 May 1988.
Noriega-Curtis, P. & Vera Rivas, J, 1989, A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Latin America, FAO, Rome, ADCP/REP/89/39
Pillai, T.G. 1988. Aquaculture Development and Planning. (eds.) King H and Ibrahim K, Village Level Aquaculture Development In Africa. Proceedings of the Commonwealth Consultative Workshop on Village Level Aquaculture Development in Africa, Freetown, Sierra Leone, 14-20 February 1985. Commonwealth Secretariat, London, pp 85-92.
Pollnac, R.B. 1982. Sociocultural Aspects of Implementing Aquaculture Systems in Marine Fishing Communities. (eds.) Peterson S and Smith L.J. Aquaculture Development in Less Developed Countries: Social, Economic and Political Problems, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp 31-52.
Richards, P. 1989. Agriculture as a Performance. In: (eds.) Chambers R, Pacey A, and Thrupp L, Farmer First: Farmer Innovation in Agricultural Research; Intermediate Technology Publications; London
Satia, B. 1989. A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara. FAO. Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, Rome, ADCP/REP/89/36.
Schwartz, N., Molnar J., Lovshin L. 1988. Cooperatively managed projects and rapid assessment: suggestions from a Panamanian case. Human Organization, Vol. 47. No. 1 pp 1-14.
Scoones, I. and Thompson, J. Beyond Farmer First. Rural People's Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension Practice; Intermediate Technology Publications, London.
Townsley, P. 1992. Rapid Rural Appraisal. What Did ALCOM Attempt in Zimbabwe? What was the Outcome? ALCOM News, No. 5
Trottier, B. 1987. Women in Aquaculture Production in West Africa. (eds.) Nash C, C Engle and D Crosetti. Women in Aquaculture. Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. FAO, Rome, ADCP/REP/87/28. pp 17-28.
Wijkstrom, U. 1989. Síntesis Regional de los Informes Nacionales sobre la Planificación de la Acuicultura; Reunión Técnica de Planificación de la Acuicultura en América Latina, FAO Proyecto AQUILA I. Documento de Campo No 16. Caracas, Venezuela.
Wijkstrom, U. 1991. How Fish culture Can Stimulate Economic Growth: Conclusions from Fish Farmer Surveys in Zambia; ALCOM GCP/INT/436/REP.9
Woodford Berger, P. 1987. Gender, Rural Development and Aquaculture in Southern Africa: Factors Affecting the Representational Involvement Of Women. University of Stockholm, Development Study Unit, Department of Social Anthropology. Report, 14.
<section>8</section>
Appendix 2: Objectives and Indicators for Aquaculture Development
by Richard Pretto
1. INTRODUCTION
2. OBJECTIVES
3. MAIN ISSUES
4. METHODOLOGIES FOR RURAL DIAGNOSIS.
5. SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
6. MONITORING AND EVALUATION INDICATORS
7. MARKETING AND FEASIBILITY STUDIES
8. AQUACULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT
9. CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
This document is based on the author's experience, supported by a review of the literature, on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, a technological resource that is promoted in many parts of the world as a tool for improving the quality of life of the inhabitants of rural communities.
Significant efforts to disseminate Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture have been made in various parts of the world. There has been enough time and financial resources devoted to make errors and successes in a long and painful process of trial and error. We now have the experience necessary to allow us not only to define goals in the short, medium, and long term, but also the information needed to achieve them. However, during the course of this paper, we will question how much of the work that has been planned has been actually accomplished.
Although there has been quite a bit of progress in the use of new methodologies to evaluate this type of results, including the use of qualitative indicators, which complement the use of more objective quantitative indicators; these techniques remain scarcely used, perhaps because of a lack of appreciation or knowledge on the part of planners and developing countries.
In addressing these problems, we should evaluate the ease with which Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture can be promoted within the fall context of sustainable rural development, where the cultivation of different aquaculture species, whether plants or animals, is integrated with crop and livestock production as another agricultural activity of the farm, and not just as an isolated activity (IICA, 1995).
On the other hand, the generally poor results obtained in the practice of rural aquaculture by the very poor stem from their lack of sufficient land and other agricultural resources, which makes it rather difficult for them to benefit from Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture (Martinez-Espinosa, 1994). These groups require other forms of support, such as food aid, and their involvement in alternative solutions, such the creation of jobs in surrounding urban areas.
2. OBJECTIVES
2.1 Short-Term Goals
2.2 Medium-Term Goals
2.3 Long-Term Goals
In order to contribute to the socio-economic sustainability of families and rural communities having good conditions for the successful development of aquaculture activities, Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture must reach the short, medium, and long-term goals of providing food security, improving nutrition, generating supplementary income, and protecting the environment
2.1 Short-Term Goals
· Familiarizing the farmer with the multiple uses of water stored in ponds and small impoundments.
Our viewpoint is that there is not enough awareness of the importance of "harvesting water," particularly in those countries that have well defined rainy and dry periods.
· Developing the capacity of farmers so that, through their own observations and reasoning, they are able to solve limitations to the implementation of rural aquaculture projects, thereby improving the productivity of household farm units.
We believe that a great majority of farmers have not developed the independent capacity to run their own production units and thus continue to depend on governmental or non governmental technical assistance.
· Incorporating aquaculture activities within production systems for terrestrial plant and animal species, under a context of diversification that makes farm production systems more sustainable.
In this aspect, those countries where rural aquaculture is under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, rather than the Ministry of Fisheries, are more advanced.
· Contributing to the diversification and enhanced nutritional value of family diets.
In general, small ponds associated with pig and poultry activities provide fish yields that positively impact upon the family's diet. When other by products are utilized for pond fertilization, production tends to be less and more sporadic due to the poor quality of other bio-fertilizers.
· Securing farmers and their families in their local communities, working to obtain optimal yields from the exploitation of their land, and avoiding their migration to big cities, with the associated social and economic problems.
The author has not found evidence of positive results regarding this goal.
2.2 Medium-Term Goals
· Participating in the marketing of products, such as fingerlings and fresh or processed fish, which contribute to the diversification of family incomes, in addition to the traditional trade in other terrestrial agricultural products obtained from their production units.
Fresh fish is marketed in some occasions, but fry and fingerlings are rarely sold.
· Protecting water sources.
In general, the impact is minimal; however, awareness is necessary to avoid future problems.
· Assuring a solid basis for farm production through the optimal use of land and biotechnical resources available to community members, in order to produce enough food to satisfy the needs of humans and farm animals.
Sustainable farm production systems are increasingly becoming the object of the extension efforts of many rural development organizations.
· Generating a reliable data base on production and the costs of different production systems.
There is a general lack of reliable data on the production and economics of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture activities.
2.3 Long-Term Goals
· Achieving the capacity of farmers to market their agricultural products, including those of aquaculture origin, which contribute to income generation.
Due to their long traditions of practicing rural aquaculture, countries from the Asian region are more successful in generating income from this activity.
· Contributing to the management of micro-basins using sustainable practices that help stabilize water resources, improve ecological conditions and maintain bio-diversity.
The author have seen positive results in this area in several Asian countries, and a few examples in Africa and Latin America. Farmers of the southern USA give particular emphasis to the protection of micro basins, incorporating sport fishing at the farm level.
· Planning the reduction of external technical assistance, so that farmers take complete control of their production projects.
We don't know of any definitive achievements relating to this goal; however the modernization and globalization of the economies in which most governments are involved point toward this direction.
· Generating local technological experiences, in agreement with the efficient use of the available resources, and compatible with local cultural traditions and ecological preservation.
Financial institutions such as the World Bank, IFAD, IDB, and others, have linked rural poverty to the deterioration of natural renewable resources.
3. MAIN ISSUES
3.1 Macropolitics
3.2 Applied Research
3.3 Training
3.4 Commercialization
3.5 Producer's Organizations
3.6 Technical Assistance
3.7 Equipment and Inputs
3.8 Legal Dispositions
3.9 Micropolitics
3.10 Biofertilizers in Fish Culture
3.1 Macropolitics
The majority of governments are involved, in one way or another, with aquaculture action plans (Pillay, T. 1983). These plans, some well advanced while others are incipient, are formulated to promote, facilitate, and guide aquaculture activities in the rural environment. Rural inhabitants should reach sustainable economic standards in agreement with social objectives that pursue food security, employment, income generation, and the preservation of natural resources, among others. However, the whole setting requires more coherence, since, in practice many fundamental aspects are not properly addressed.
3.2 Applied Research
There is no doubt that research constitutes an important part of the governmental effort to support development, and that research emphasis should be directed to the validation of crop systems, taking into consideration the different political, social, cultural, economic and ecological implications which are always present in the rural environment.
An important limitation is the almost complete lack of experience possessed by many governmental and non-governmental institutions involved in sustainable rural development activities in terms of productions systems, which integrates aquatic and terrestrial crops and procures an efficient use of resources, such as soil, water, manual labor and family time. This situation is probably due to failure to recognize the importance of the subject, limited financial resources or simple ignorance.
On the other hand, extension workers involved in the promotion of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture who are responsible for the preparation of training material and the planning and follow up of annual farm activities, have limited access to research results, hindering their successful contribution to farmer's production results.
3.3 Training
Because extension workers often take paternalistic and very interventionist approaches when assisting farmers, rather than acting as "facilitators" of the production process, few farmers learn from and gather experience by self observation and reasoning by facing new problems. It is also clear that a great majority of the extensionists involved in rural aquaculture do not have solid practical experience, because they have been poorly exposed to integrated production systems, to favoring the use of local resources, to minimizing the loss of nutrients, to using integrated management pest control, to crop rotation and to many other sustainable practices (Pretto, R. 1985).
Extensionists, in general, have experienced difficulties in successfully reaching these types of clients. Due to financial limitations and the employment of incorrect extension methodologies, many governments face difficulties in their attempts to help farmers reach a self management stage of development (Zapata, F. 1993).
3.4 Commercialization
When marketing of fish has been promoted in rural areas, several aspects have been frequently overlooked, such as the need for fish preservation, storage facilities, adequate transportation, and knowledge of wholesale and retail trade. Frequently, activities are developed without an initial planning phase to identify fundamental aspects, such as the potential markets and their volumes (Drewes, E. 1988).
Some projects have been promoted through the offering of credit without assuring that conditions exist that guarantee the commercial viability of the activity. For example, problems with transportation, markets, production volumes, product quality, etc. may make it difficult to repay loans.
A great majority of these projects have been subsidized with grants given by donor agencies to governments and NGOs. Non-sustainable technologies, such as the use of concentrated feed, which is not affordable to poor farmers, have been frequently promoted. As a result, when grant funds are finished, production efforts are minimal.
3.5 Producer's Organizations
Various types of producer's organizations are promoted, in different parts of the world, as a means by which farmers may benefit from cooperative efforts. Projects are implemented so that farmers get acquainted with sustainable technologies suitable to their farm conditions. New experiences gained through communal projects are then transferred by farmers to their individual plots.
In order to strengthen farmer's organizations, much effort should be placed in this area, so that farmers will achieve the capacity to implement appropriate solutions using proper administrative and management control practices (Lacki, P. 1995).
3.6 Technical Assistance
In general, governmental extension services lack the necessary funds and adequate infrastructure to offer the assistance required by small farmers in such areas as integrated crop production, fish health, fish nutrition, seed production, aquacultural infrastructure, production economics, water quality, etc.
More recently, governments and NGOs are promoting demonstration farms for sustainable agriculture so farmers may reach self sufficiency in such aspects as seed production, grow out, diet diversification and marketing. However, in general, these efforts are still considered small. To provide service to these farmers, it is necessary to establish "Sustainable Development Committees" organized in provincial federations and national confederations.
Governments, NGOs and universities should provide technical assistance to these federations and confederations, and also continue to act as facilitators, promoting intersectorial coordination among agencies. Actions should be directed towards producing concrete results which will be perceived by farmers as directly benefiting them.
3.7 Equipment and Inputs
Some rural aquaculture projects have been promoted which have depended on high cost electronic instruments, chemicals, and farm machinery which are inaccessible to small-scale farmers. Infrastructure for Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture must be constructed using low level technology and aquaculture ponds must be stocked with fish species which are highly resistant to management errors and to disease. It is essential that this type of activity emphasize the use of those technologies that give priority to the utilization of local resources.
3.8 Legal Dispositions
In many countries, legislation dealing with the practice of rural aquaculture is very weak or nonexistent. In some nations, the number of regulations has increased according to the development of the activity, addressing such aspects as the importance of preserving water quality and the environment in general, and penalizing poaching, and other harmful activities.
3.9 Micropolitics
Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, when integrated into other agricultural activities, is a means to diversify farm production, opening the possibility of increased productivity through a better utilization of farms resources such as land, water, manpower, and equipment (Pullin, et al. 1980)
Activities to expand rural aquaculture have normally failed to consider existing information ^1 at the farm level, in relation to climate, topography, soil texture, predominant flora, water resources, availability of biofertilizers and other by-products, ^2 and the possibility of integrating different crops and farm animals, among others. At the same time, the possibility of obtaining governmental support, which generally is scanty and deficient, has been overestimated.
^1 It is necessary to identify the different limitant and favourable conditions to decide on alternative uses of soil resources such as water availability, possibility of gravity source, topographic suitability for pond construction vs. the requirements of associated crops, size of plots dedicated to grain and vegetable crops, and also food needs for family and farm animals.
^2 Small-scale rural aquaculture must be oriented to families that are in other agricultural activities which generate by-products and other foods for the cultivation of aquatic organisms. It is convenient to promote the establishment of different agricultural species adequately integrated under a scheme of nutrients recycling and the total use of all by-products available at farm and/or local levels. It takes at least three to five years to establish a diversity of crops and farm animals, new techniques to be learned, and farm labour reorganization under a scheme of nutrient recycling and total use of all production factors available at the farm level, based on an autonomous agroecosystem in harmony with nature. Two-year projects are thus condemned to failure.
Lately, a major effort has been observed in the promotion of new projects to identify targeted groups by implementing socio-economic surveys and other participatory research methods that gather information on several aspects, such as traditional crops, income levels, the situation with regard to natural resources, accessibility to urban centers, availability of technical assistance, living conditions and so on.
In many instances, communal projects have experienced poor results. The objective is that all members participate in both the learning of rural fish culture methodologies, and the benefits from production yields. Problems arise when projects are implemented without project members first being motivated and conscious of their responsibilities and duties in the execution of the different activities.
Although the associative concept facilitates the extension activities of governments and NGOs, there have been several cases in which, scarcely a year after implementing a production project, the land owner who transferred it to the group claims unilateral control of the project and its improvements. When this situation is not resolved, the project is suspended and, in many cases, the production infrastructure developed is abandoned.
Another difficulty that is very common, occurs when the harvest is divided according to the time dedicated to the project by its members. With time, some members drop out the project, leaving only a few members. This situation is not considered too negative, because the remaining farmers, in certain way, have been self-selected as those committed to achieving further progress.
When farm by-products are utilized as fish feed, yields tend to be lower than those obtained when concentrated feed is given. However, when the quality and quantity of bio-fertilizer given is appropriate, high yields are reported. The important point is that production systems that depend on local resources tend to be more sustainable.
A frequent error found in many projects, is the promotion of rural aquaculture as a miraculous formula to solve protein deficiency problems, with the resulting farmer's frustration when they compare results with production efforts. When food sources for feeding fish have not been planned, the underfeeding which may result will negatively affect yields.
3.10 Biofertilizers in Fish Culture
Although African and Latin American countries do not have an aquaculture tradition comparable to that found in China, cultural barriers against the use of organic biofertilizer obtained from various farm animals for fertilizing fish ponds has not been observed. Instead, when people from these areas understand the basic principles and rules for organic fertilization, they rapidly adapt, or introduce them to their production systems.
However, in contrast to the Asian countries, where manure and crop wastes are sometimes composted, in Latin America and Africa, the tendency is to apply these materials directly to the ponds, not taking advantage of their conversion, through an anaerobic process, into products high in carbohydrate, a high quality food source with better protein content.
Farmers from marginal areas generally keep a variety of farm animals, but they are not confined. When animals are kept loose, it is difficult to obtain enough of the organic matter required for proper pond water fertilization. Confined animals, such as chickens and pigs, require, on the other hand, a balanced diet which may compete with farmer's family diet.
We are aware of projects in different countries where animals kept in confinement were undernourished due to poor feeding regimes, producing biofertilizers of low quality. It is also common to associate animals such as pigs with fish cultivation, but in isolated areas obtaining commercial concentrated feed and delivering finished products to the market may be a problem.
In inaccessible areas, better results have been obtained by associating ruminants with fish culture activities, due to the fact that the food required for these animals, such as grasses, is available at the farm sites. Although fish production is low under these circumstances, it is sustainable.
As this type of fish farmer lacks the knowledge and conditions required to do artificial reproduction, stocking of species such as tilapias and common carp is favored, due to their capacity for self-reproduction in ponds. In high altitude areas, cooler waters affect the growth rate of tilapias, so common carp are more appropriate. In general, farmers have great difficulties in becoming self sufficient with fish seed, frequently causing ponds to remain without stocking long after harvest.
A new, less paternalistic development paradigm is necessary to promote small-scale rural aquaculture. Production based on locally available resources should be emphasized, including food sources for farm animals, without affecting family food requirements. Other production components, such as the use of trees should be oriented towards protecting the watersheds and other water courses. Producers should take steps towards achieving self-sufficiency in fish seed production, through individual or collective efforts.
It will be very helpful to develop and adopt a series of standards in relation to organic fertilization, taking into consideration the specific situation of each region (Delmendo, M. 1984).
4. METHODOLOGIES FOR RURAL DIAGNOSIS.
4.1 Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
It is widely accepted that conventional methods for socio-economic rural diagnosis have not been very effective in determining the real needs and aspirations of people when development projects are formulated. In this context, new diagnostic methods have appeared, such as rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal (PRA), that incorporate community members in the identification, analysis and evaluation of their limitations and possibilities, according to their own perceptions, so that together with institutional facilitators priorities are established.
These diagnostic participatory methodologies are accomplished through semi-structured interviews, the employment of different information gathering techniques, the elaboration of model maps, the prioritizing of community problems, joint evaluations and the presentation of results to participants.
However, in planning aquaculture projects associated with other farm activities, complementary information is required, such as the:
1. Level of requirements for products of animal and vegetable origin that could be produced in the region, subject to development efforts.
2. Possibilities of introducing the aquaculture component and obtaining satisfactory levels.
3. Degree of production needed to satisfy self nutrition requirements, and commercialization of surplus production.
4. Capacity of government extension services to assist the project, and the support required from non-governmental organizations, universities, cooperatives, and private enterprises with experience in rural development.
5. Animal and vegetable species, in addition to the aquatic species, with production potential in the study area, either for soil enhancement, forage production, food for human consumption, food for farm animals, firewood, timber, etc.
6. Community infrastructure necessary to guarantee the success of production activities for nutritional self-sufficiency and income generation, for example, roads and bridges to guarantee technical assistance; access to inputs and marketing of surplus production; health centers, so that farmers can maintain good physical fitness to devote more time and effort to increasing production; improvement of housing conditions to assure adequate rest after field work; better accessibility to water for domestic consumption, to firewood, and to improved stoves and other domestic facilities, so that women and youth have more time available to devote to food production activities.
Diagnostic and participative research methodology has acquired a great popularity and is widely supported by financial agencies, NGOs and, most recently, by governmental institutions. The experience gained in Panama with participative rural appraisal methodologies indicates that field information should be complemented simultaneously with other traditional methodologies, such as the use of questionnaires and surveys.
4.1 Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
Geographic information systems (GIS) are based in the synthesis of spatial and non-spatial data obtained from different sources: These include cartographic information, such as the location of main streams, roads, towns, and political divisions, and data from other sources, such as aerial photography, remote sensing and census.
GIS cover such aspects as the physical, biotic, and socioeconomic situation of study areas. Transects are established for a detailed characterization of the vegetation, biodiversity, and aquatic and terrestrial fauna and flora. They include such topics as alternative uses of soils, management zones, project situation, actual use of soil, erosion, geomorphology, hydrology, litology, placement of towns, etc. The information obtained can contribute to support an increased number of small-scale aquaculture projects.
In developing countries, GIS is considered relatively new, and its efficiency is limited by the lack of dependable and reliable data to feed the system. However, it is recognized that in the future these methodologies will become important tools for planning sustainable rural development activities, including fish cultivation.
5. SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
5.1 Seed Production
5.2 Fish Feed
5.3 Fish Species
5.4 Fishing Gear
5.5 Production Expectations
5.6 Technical Assistance Reduction
In certain cases, Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture can contribute to improving the quality of life in marginal areas, if a series of factors which determine the success or the failure of the activity is taken into consideration (Duncan, B. 1983).
The importance of several of these factors has become evident based on difficulties with rural aquaculture projects encountered in various parts of the world. For American and African countries, this is the price of learning a relatively new activity, a process of trial and error which is still in evolution (FAO, UNDP, NORAD, 1987).
To begin Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture requires more than a good water source. A compromise should be reached among different factors, such as: size and number of ponds required, design of the infrastructure, and availability of by-products for organic fertilization and fish food.
Also, pond management plans, including the selection of fish species to be cultivated, the size of fingerlings to be stocked, stocking densities, fattening periods, weight at harvest, and seed sources, should be considered. The availability of seine nets for partial harvesting, the use that will be given to the production, either for self consumption or for income generation, the possibilities of preservation, the availability of family labor to attend the different production activities, the knowledge level about fish cultivation and agricultural activities in general, and the possibility of integrating the different agricultural activities to take advantage of available water, are also some of the relevant issues in relation to Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture and its logistics.
5.1 Seed Production
Many Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture projects remain active until the promoting organization ceases to provide fish seed. At this point, the beneficiaries experience serious difficulties in obtaining fry for stocking, either because of a lack of financial resources for purchasing fingerlings or due to a lack of transportation facilities. In many projects, seed are provided free of cost, without making provision for training the participants in seed production. As a consequence, ponds experiencing excellent production remain full of water, but without fish culture activity.
It is extremely important that projects, especially those in remote areas, train the participants in fish seed production, incorporating at the same time the necessary infrastructure, such as earthen ponds for spawning and for raising fingerlings.
The fish species employed under these situations should be those low in the food web, with reproduction occurring under natural conditions. Species that require hormone-induced reproduction and sophisticated infrastructure for seed production should not be considered.
Just as subsistence farmers make provision for the reproduction of other farm animals, they should also produce their own fish fingerlings. In many parts of the world, tilapia and common carp are considered the most suitable fish species for use in rural aquaculture because they reproduce naturally in ponds, are very resistant to management error, have fast growth rates, and are herbivorous-omnivorous. Chinese carps ^3, and Colosoma ^4 species require induced reproduction, so they are not recommended for Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, unless where they occur naturally, in which case farmers can collect seed from the wild.
^3 Chinese carps and other species can contribute in a significant way as a source of protein by stocking them periodically in large impoundments to which poor farmers have access, fishing them with different gears. In Panama an exotic species, Tucunare (Cichla ocellaris), from the Amazon Basin is a very important source of animal protein for poor people who live around lake Gatun, an impoundment involved in the operation of the Panama Canal. Other impoundments built for hydroelectric or irrigation purposes (North of Brazil) also produce fish for the benefit of artisanal fishermen.
^4 In those areas where colossoma occurs naturally, poor farmers stock their ponds collecting seeds from the wild from those areas where fingerlings accumulate in the dry period. This is common in Brazil and Venezuela.
In Panama rice-fish cultivation ponds are also used for tilapia seed production, supplying fingerlings to regular grow-out ponds.
In Panama, a maximum of three types of pond per project has been recommended (Pretto, et al 1983), ponds for reproduction, grow out, and fattening. The size of the fattening ponds should not be less than 300 m^2, with 500 m^2 or more being much better. The minimum number of ponds per project should be at least two: one dedicated to the reproduction of adults and fingerling production, and the other for grow out to harvestable size. However, a great number of projects still depend on government aid for provision of fish seed. This situation is particularly common in Latin America and Africa. In the southern USA, small water impoundments are stocked with two local species that reproduce freely such as largemouth black bass (Micropterus salmoides) and bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus).
5.2 Fish Feed
When they raise pigs or chickens, farmers are conscious that the rate of growth will depend on the quantity and quality of the rations given to these animals. However, this is not the case when dealing with fish culture, and frequently fish are underfed, producing very low yields at harvest, a situation that eventually could discourage farmer interest in this activity. Underfeeding can be a consequence of a lack of access to agricultural by-products by farmers.
5.3 Fish Species
Several tilapia species are frequently utilized in Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, favouring different strains of Oreochromis niloticus and O. aureaus. They all require warm water (25-29 °C) for optimum growth. For cooler areas, common carp are considered more suitable because of their wider range of water temperature toleration (20-30 °C). In Central America, as elsewhere, both local and introduced species are cultivated.. Where seed obtained from the wild is available, local species are favored. This is the case for "guapote tigre" (Cichlasoma managuensis), brown shrimp (Macrobrachium amazonicum) and freshwater snail (Pomacea zetequi), among others. The polyculture of tilapia and common carp is highly recommended, especially under situations where good sources of organic fertilizers rich in detritus, such as cattle, pig or chicken manures, are available.
Among other factors, stocking density depends upon pond water exchange capacity, that is, the greater the volume of water which can be exchanged, the higher the stocking rate that is possible, as long as provisions are made for the increased feed required to assure acceptable yields. In general, in this type of project, stocking density is in the range of 1-2 fingerlings per m^2 of pond surface, taking 6 to 10 months for fish to reach harvestable size. However, reproduction frequently occurs in these ponds and populations become stunted, unless fishing pressure through partial harvesting is applied to get rid of unwanted excess reproduction. Attempts to produce all male tilapia by hybridization were not successful with this type of clientele.
5.4 Fishing Gear
In small-scale aquaculture projects, poor farmers often cannot afford to buy a net. Many countries do not produce fish nets, requiring the importation of such items. When fishing gear is lacking, fishing pressure is inadequate, and ponds are fished only when the extension agents make nets available. In other situations, even if nets are provided by the project, they eventually deteriorate, and when funds are exhausted, fishing pressure and yields diminish.
Ponds for self sufficiency should be harvested periodically ^5 using different gear such as hook and line, traps, seines, etc. Ponds act as refrigerators, keeping protein units alive ready for later consumption and avoiding the preservation costs of a product that has, by nature, a short shelf life.
^5 The alternative of total harvesting by draining the pond still remains. The inconvenience is a large amount offish made available once or twice a year, instead of small amounts all-year-around.
It is necessary to validate the efficiency of different types of fishing gear which are constructed with local materials successfully employed for partial harvesting in other parts of the world, such as in Thailand, the Philippines, and China. The repair and maintenance of fishing nets have not been given the importance that they require. Seines can also be constructed with local products, such as burlap bags.
5.5 Production Expectations
It is very common to create, among participant farmers, expectations of unrealistically large fish yields. Is necessary to take into consideration that fish culture is a non-traditional activity for the majority of people in Latin America and Africa, and that it requires a process of learning by doing, and also its harmonization with the production of other farm products, such as vegetables, grains, fruits, firewood, timber and farm animals, among other production components.
In the past, fish culture has been promoted without taking into consideration the other needs of the farmer, his family and rural community as a whole, such as roads, housing, latrines, wells, stoves, domestic supplies, medicine, clothes, education, and also infrastructural facilities for meetings, sports and religious activities, etc. These aspects should be analyzed at the time that production plans are conceived.
5.6 Technical Assistance Reduction
In the majority of the projects where small-scale rural aquaculture has been promoted, a planned reduction of external technical assistance has not been considered. It is necessary to place more effort on developing self-sufficiency, so that farmers reach the capacity to manage their own production units (Bordenav E.J. 1976).
6. MONITORING AND EVALUATION INDICATORS
6.1 Species Diversity
6.2 Bioresources Recycling
6.3 Productive Capacity of the Natural Resources Base
6.4 Economic Efficiency (Cost/Benefit Ratio)
6.5 Other Indicators
When assessing the potential for fish culture, one of the limitations that some undeveloped countries face is a lack of information on current situations and perspectives in local areas. Also appropriate indicators for monitoring project accomplishment in terms of food security, earnings equity, sustainability of activities, etc. are lacking (Engle, C. 1986).
Traditional indicators focus on measuring quantitative aspects, such as income, production and productivity levels, making it difficult to relate results to social-economic aspects, such as employment and under-employment, the concentration and distribution of income, food availability to individual family members, and the level of improvement of the nutritional state of a population as a whole.
Simple, realistic and reliable indicators that can supply a clear picture of the role of small-scale aquaculture in rural development are still lacking.
Various authors have proposed a series of qualitative indicators as a wider evaluation tool to determine whether goals established have been accomplished, so that adjustments can be introduced during the course of the project. Many of these indicators go beyond the execution period of the project, allowing the documentation of evidence of the sustainability of activities:
6.1 Species Diversity
It is necessary to identify, for every local condition, the aquatic and terrestrial species that are compatible, so as to consolidate a production base that will supply a sustainable source of foods year round and in sufficient amounts to satisfy the nutritional needs of humans and farm animals.
6.2 Bioresources Recycling
The experience gained by many countries involved in small-scale aquaculture confirms the positive impact of utilizing farm by products on the sustainability of agro-aquaculture activities, by lowering production costs, generating income, and reducing risks.
6.3 Productive Capacity of the Natural Resources Base
As a fundamental natural resource which supports agro-aquaculture activities, soil can become a factor limiting production when technologies that do not preserve soil fertility are followed.
In general, there is a lack of aquatic inventories, with a limited number of studies which consider the multiple uses of water sources. In general, countries have only a small amount of information about the optimal use of these resources.
6.4 Economic Efficiency (Cost/Benefit Ratio) ^6
^6 The net return of a project is the return after substracting the costs. If the net return is positive the project is profitable, if it is negative, the project is considered non-profitable.
The operation of fish culture activities in farm households incorporates women and the young into the food production process.
When populations are concentrated around rural projects, migration to urban areas diminishes, because local populations become active participants in production.
6.5 Other Indicators
Food security, in a wider context, should not only measure food abundance, its availability year round and access to it, but should also measure changes in the type and quality of products available for family consumption. In every case, it is more important to monitor the state of the natural resources at the farm, the community and the regional level, because it is known that environmental deterioration is closely linked to poverty.
Several other parameters should be taken into consideration, for example, family planning to reduce the number of children; improvement of education, health standards, and housing level, and improvement of access roads and transportation facilities, all of which contribute also to lower rates of infant mortality and morbidity and influence the quality of rural life.
Organizational efforts to overcome inferior life styles, to reduce geographic dispersion and migration to urban centers, and to increase job opportunities and the active participation of people in problem solving are all social indicators that should be taken into consideration as primary indicators of success or failure of projects.
7. MARKETING AND FEASIBILITY STUDIES
Most farm units in Central America have less than 2 ha of land. Farmers market less than half of what they produce. They lack credit and produce with very low technology mainly rice, corn, beans, plantain and some root crops.
The experience in Latin America (Noriega, C. et al. 1989) indicates that project implementation has been oriented towards nutritional improvement, poverty reduction and income generation by marketing small amounts of extra production. There is evidence that, in general, the implementation of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture activities has not produced a real impact on meeting the needs of small-scale farmers (AQUILA, 1994).
Feasibility studies for Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture should provide information on such aspects as:
· The existence of markets for surplus production.
· Access to the required human, material, administrative and financial resources for project implementation.
· Demonstration of the financial, economic and social advantages of assigning resources to fish culture under a scheme of integration with other farm activities.
In many cases Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture projects has been only oriented by general profiles of the geographic areas and of participants/producers. The reasons for this include the imposition of projects by governmental institutions claiming valid alternatives to fight hunger and poverty, and to make optimal use of resources in each region. (Wijkstrom, U. 1989).
A noticeable lack of information and appropriate statistics at the farm level adds to this situation, which is frequently aggravated by the limited resources available to the institutions supporting these development activities. The importance of such studies for effective decision making on the design, execution, evaluation and follow up of development projects is recognized.
The economic feasibility of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture activities is strengthened when, in addition to components that directly influence the cost and current income, other elements, such species diversification and integration in the context of multiple water users, the optimal use of family labor, processing crops, nutrient recycling, etc. are considered.
During project design, a series of parameters that define an economic baseline should be considered. These include the annual distribution of manual labor, the current regime of water and land resource utilization, and the availabilities of farm animals as a source of organic manures, other farm byproducts, and financial resources for purchasing other required inputs.
Another important criteria is the potential change in the use of resources before and after project activities. The effect of these changes in food production is considered very important in economic feasibility studies. If a new crop, say cultured fish, competes with the food resources available for family self nutrition, most probably the conflict will be resolved by favoring the family's nutritional needs.
8. AQUACULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT
8.1 Effects of Aquaculture Practices on the Environment
8.2 Effects of Non-Aquacultural Activities on Rural Aquaculture
8.1 Effects of Aquaculture Practices on the Environment
The environmental effects resulting from small-scale rural aquaculture projects are mostly positive. The construction of small impoundments influences the microecological conditions of the flooded agricultural land. The presence of standing water favors silt precipitation, presenting the opportunity to incorporate "harvested" nutrients into different food webs that enhance the production of a diversity of aquatic species, increasing fish yields.
When ponds are managed to maintain an optimum primary productivity, drainage water will contain large amounts of nutrients. When this water is used for irrigation, crop yields increase. Ponds with water rich in nutrients equally favor higher fish production (Alien, et al. 1976).
Areas flooded after pond construction increase their water tables, opening the possibility of establishing shallow wells for domestic water supply ^7. Wildlife, including birds, take advantage of these impoundment waters, especially during dry periods. After impoundment construction, areas under erosion by surface water run off no longer lose fertile topsoil.
^7 Although fertilized pond water is ideal for fish production, it should never be used for drinking, cooking, dishwashing or bathing purposes, without adequate treatment, as micro-organisms present in the water may cause intestinal or cutaneous infections. After harvesting, people should wash thoroughly with abundant soap and water.
Trees which will provide fruit or lumber can be planted in the areas surrounding the impounded water, influencing the microcline and, as they grow, favoring the introduction of other farm animals and crops which require shade. Small farm animals and other crops, such as culinary and medicinal plants, all of which contribute to the productivity of household units, can also be considered.
8.2 Effects of Non-Aquacultural Activities on Rural Aquaculture
Water contamination problems are uncommon in Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture because these activities are normally developed in areas far from the influence of urban and agro-industrial activities. Also springs and other water sources originate in the surrounding micro-watersheds. Mortality of fish ^8 due to pesticide contamination sometimes occurs, especially when farmers are not careful when washing equipment and in disposing of bags, cans and other toxic chemical containers.
^8 The number offish that die daily in a pond can be an indication of the type of existing problem. When a large number offish die during the night, lack of exygen is probably responsible, even if they do not die, they will be ighly.
Mortalities, low growth rates, and diseases may affect fish when aerial spraying is carried out without taking into consideration wind direction and intensity.
In some countries, important water sources are temporarily contaminated by the release of sugar must, a by-product of sugar cane processing which has high carbohydrate concentration, causing a high biological oxygen demand. Fish from artisanal fisheries lose quality when lagoons receive human sewage from large cities, heavy metals and pathogenic microorganisms being the most common contaminants of fish flesh under these conditions.
Deforestation of watersheds affects the amount and quality of water available for rural aquaculture and other uses. This process is starting to reverse, thanks to private and governmental awareness of the importance in taking steps to preserve natural resources.
9. CONCLUSIONS
1. Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture presents a wide range of cases, both successes and failures, with more positive results occurring in Asia, where fish culture has been practiced for many generations, and more failures in Africa and Latin America.
2. Where promotion of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture has not completely succeeded, a common error has been the initiation of an activity without a previous period for training farmers to analyze a diversity of factors which effect results.
3. Because of an abundance of soft funds provided by governmental agencies, NGOs and the private sector, a great majority of small-scale aquaculture projects have been subsidized in an extremely paternalistic way. After funds are exhausted, activities are frequently abandoned due to the poor training in sustainable technologies received by their participants. Projects depending for production on the use of concentrated feeds or chemical fertilizers, or which do not produce their own fish seed are, in general, non-sustainable.
4. In the future, economic resources for supporting the development of small-scale aquaculture activities will be more limited because of structural adjustments introduced by most undeveloped countries. It is necessary to accelerate the privatization of extension services, so that governmental institutions play the new role of facilitators, and no longer as interventionists, so that farmers become more capable of self-management.
5. The development of local planning mechanisms should be strengthened in order to guarantee the sustainability of project activities in the medium and long term.
6. Producer organizations should receive more practical training, in order to establish a solid basis for the development of the capacity for self-initiative. Farmers should be able to efficiently identify and analyze the requirements needed for Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture and other farm production activities and the problems likely to be encountered during implementation. Springs and other sources of running water can be "harvested" in small impoundments for multiple farm uses, such as irrigation, fish culture, and provision of water for farm animals and domestic consumption, contributing to improving the well being of inhabitants of rural areas through better nutrition and income generation.
7. Chicken, pig and cattle manure, leaves, rice bran and other farm by-products are normally used in Latin America and Africa in Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture. In some cases, Asian countries also compost this material before fertilizing ponds. Commercial feeds are rarely used.
8. Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture should be given another opportunity, within the broader context of sustainable rural development, for the benefit of large populations demanding better nutrition and labor opportunities.
9. New projects should be given a longer period of support, with at least three to five years allowed for the infrastructure required for sustainable production to be established at the farm level. Two to three year projects are condemned to failure.
REFERENCES *
* Apart from the layout, the references are as presented by the author
Alien, G.H., Y.B. Hepher. 1976. Recycling of waste through Aquaculture and constraints to wider application. Paper presented to the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture.
AQUILA. 1994. Diagnóstico sobre el Estado de la Acuicultura en América Latina y el Caribe; AQUILA II Documento de Campo No. 11.
Bordenav, E.J. 1976. Las nuevas pedagogias y Tecnologías de comunicación. Revisión de consulta sobre la investigación para el Desarrollo Rural, Cali, Colombia.
Delmendo, M. 1984. Fishculture integrated to animal husbandry projects. Traducción al Español por Pablo Vergara-MIDA. FAO para Asia y Latino Oriente, Bangkok, Tailandia.
Drewes, E. 1988. Socio-Cultural, Socio-Economic, Bio-Environmental and Bio-Technical aspects of Aquaculture in Rural Development. Report prepared for the Aquaculture for local community development programme, FI:GCP/INT436/SWE.1, FAO, ROME.
Duncan, B. 1983. Aquaculture-water-harvesting. A joint PVO Program. Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, 36830.
Engle, C. 1986. Criterios para la Preparación y Evaluación de Proyectos de Acuicultura de Subsistencia. RLAC/85/44/PES-8. Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Agricultura y la Alimentación, Santiago, Chile.
FAO, UNDP, NORAD. 1987. Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture. FAO. Rome.
IICA. 1995. Desarrollo sostenible de la agricultura y los recursos naturales: el problema y sus dimensiones. Instituto Interamericano de Cooperación para la Agricultura. Servicio Especializado Y: Capacitación, Educación y Comunicación y GTZ. San Jose, Costa Rica.
Lacki, P. 1995. Desarrollo Agropecuario: de la Dependencia al Protagonismo del Agricultor. Serie Desarrollo Rural No. 9 (4 de.,) Oficina Regional de la FAO para América Latina y el Caribe, Santiago, Chile.
Martinez-Espinosa, M. 1994. Entre la acuicultura de los "mas pobres" y de las "menos pobres", Proyecto Aquila, Documento de Campo No. 21.
Noriega, C. JR. Vera. 1989. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in Latin America, ADCP/REP/89/39, FAO, Rome.
Pillay, T.V.R. 1983. Planificación del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura-Guía Preliminar. ADCP/REP/83/20. Programa de Desarrollo y Coordinación de la Acuicultura. FAO, ROMA. 31 pp.
Pretto, R. 1980. Aprovechamiento de las aguas y excretas de la población porcina para el cultivo de peces. Rev. Lat. Acui. Lima, Perú. No. 3:29-33.
Pretto, R. Y L. Lovshin. 1983. El empleo de la Tilapia en la Agroacuicultura Rural: La estrategia de Panamá. Rev. Lat. Acui. Lima-Perú. No. 17-1-54.
Pretto, R. 1985. La Acuicultura y el Desarrollo Rural-Capacitación y Promoción. RLAC/85/14-PES-6. Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Agricultura y la Alimentación. Santiago, Chile.
Pullin, R.S.V. 1980. Lowe-McConnell, R.H. (eds.), 1980. International Cent. Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila (Philippines).
International Conference on the Biology and Culture of Tilapias, Bellagio (Italy), 2 September 1980. ICLARM Conf. Proc. Manila, Philippines, 1982. Vol. 7, 432 pp.
Sánchez, D. 1990. Planificación del uso potencial de la Tierra. Conferencia sin publicar. Instituto de Investigaciones Agropecuarias de Panamá, Panamá.
Ureña, R. 1995. Propuesta metodológica para realizar un Diagnóstico Agropecuario Participativo en el Corregimiento Los Valles, distrito de Cañazas, Provincia de Veraguas. Panamá. Primer curso de Postgrado en Investigación y Desarrollo para uso Agrícola Sostenible de la Tierra en el Trópico Americano. CATIE-CIAT-IICA-BID. Palmira, Colombia.
Wijkstrom, U. 1989. Síntesis regional de los informes nacionales sobre la planificación de la acuicultura. Reunión Técnica de Planificación de la Acuicultura en América Latina, Caracas, Venezuela.
Zapata, F. 1993. Extensión agrícola en el Japón. La metodología del milagro agropecuario. Editorial PRADOMEDIOS. Santa Fe de Bogotá, Colombia.
<section>9</section>
Appendix 3: The Place of Aquaculture in Rural Development
by Sevaly Sen, Henk van der Mheen and Jennie van der Mheen-Sluijer
1. INTRODUCTION
2. AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT: THE MACRO-LEVEL CONTEXT
3. THE MICRO-LEVEL CONTEXT
4. SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE AND AGRICULTURE
5. INTEGRATING AGRICULTURE AND AQUACULTURE
6. MACRO-LEVEL AND MICRO-LEVEL IMPLICATIONS FOR INTEGRATED AQUACULTURE
7. AGRICULTURE AND AQUACULTURE EXTENSION APPROACHES
8. EXISTING EXTENSION SERVICES
9. OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS FOR AN INTEGRATED EXTENSION SERVICE
10. ELEMENTS OF A NOVEL EXTENSION SYSTEM
11. CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES *
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper discusses the integration of aquaculture with agriculture from the perspective of optimizing its contribution to rural development. Drawing from experiences in southern and central Africa, the paper describes the current macro-level and micro-level context in which small-scale agriculture and aquaculture operate. Technical aspects of integrated aquaculture and agriculture are described, focusing on similarities and differences. The effect of the macro and micro level environment on the development of integrated small-scale aquaculture and the contribution of integrated aquaculture to rural development objectives are then discussed. As exchange of information is considered one of the most crucial factors for sustainable rural development, different extension approaches, current agriculture and aquaculture extension services and the problems of integrating the two services are reviewed. The paper then argues for a new extension approach for integrated aquaculture
and concludes with observations on the place of aquaculture in rural development.
2. AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT: THE MACRO-LEVEL CONTEXT
Historically, many areas of sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) had low population densities and abundant land. Traditional agricultural practices often included shifting cultivation, as these were well suited to the ecology with fragile and acidic soils. In areas where population density increased slowly, these traditional systems gradually evolved into more intensive, eventually permanent systems which incorporated soil conservation, fertility management and integration of livestock into farming systems. Agricultural development in areas such as the highlands of Rwanda are a good example of this process. However, over the last thirty years, in many areas of SSA, population has been growing so rapidly that land is becoming limited and traditional systems are unable to evolve fast enough. Rural people, forced to abandon shifting cultivation methods, are cultivating the same land but continue to use traditional techniques. This has contributed to the growing problem of environmental
degradation, including deforestation and loss of soil fertility, which has affected both productivity and resource sustainability.
Many of the new technologies offered by governments and donors to the African farmer were aimed at increasing output per unit of land through increases in capital (in the form of purchased inputs and equipment) and labour inputs. However, as most African small-scale farmers are faced with limited supplies of capital and labour during part or all of the agricultural year, these kinds of technologies were, for many, the reverse of what was needed. Furthermore, agricultural development has been distorted by government controls on prices, over-valued domestic currencies, heavy taxation on agriculture exports, neglect of rural infrastructure and ineffective research and extension services.
Consequently, over the last ten years, there has been a decline in food production and a stagnation in per capita calorie consumption. It is now estimated that 100 million people are food insecure in SSA (Cleaver et al. 1995). Since most of the poor and the food insecure are rural, governments and donors are pursuing rural development strategies specifically aimed at poverty alleviation, an increase in rural incomes and employment, better food security and improved environmental sustainability. There are two main components of these strategies: the creation of an enabling macro-economic environment and the stimulation of agricultural growth.
The creation of an enabling macro-economic environment is strongly influenced by the recommendations and subsequent implementation of International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAP). SAP aims at creating a favourable macro-economic environment which encompasses two types of policies; stabilization and structural. Stabilization aims at reducing inflation and deficits in the current account of the balance of payments to levels which can be sustained. Structural policies aim to increase output over the medium term by the mobilization of domestic resources through fiscal, monetary and credit policies; improvement of the efficiency of resource allocation in general and the public sector in particular; reform of the structure of economic incentives to reduce distortions; and institutional reforms intended to support adjustment with growth (Spooner et al. 1991). These policies have led to a reduction in government resources and interventions
and a promotion of the role of the private sector.
While an enabling macro-economic environment is considered a pre-requisite to agricultural development, SAP are not considered sufficient to stimulate agricultural growth. The World Bank has recommended other issues which have to be addressed in order to increase agricultural production. These include the introduction of new technologies and higher valued crops; more intensive use of chemical and organic inputs; integration of livestock to use animal power and manure; better techniques of irrigation, hand tools, crop storage; better rural infrastructure especially roads; greater security of land tenure: better education and health for farmers; better natural resource management and protection and; greater participation of farmers in services especially women farmers.
In addition, in order to mitigate the negative effects of SAP and other liberalization policies, two types of Social Dimensions of Adjustment (SDA) programmes have been implemented in some SSA countries. The first type aims to protect or mitigate the effects of SAP on particular target groups, namely the chronic poor, the "new" poor (i.e. those directly affected by SAP) and other vulnerable groups. These programmes consist of measures targeted to groups directly affected by policy and budgetary remedies and includes compensatory measures for retrenched government workers, food-for-work programmes, provision of health services and family planning in rural areas as well as better targeted food distribution to the neediest groups. The second type of programme is aimed at problem areas which might not have necessarily resulted from SAP or economic crisis, but will have a definite impact on the long term success of SAP by helping bring the poor and vulnerable groups into the
economic mainstream. Programmes include the promotion of small and medium sized enterprises, land distribution schemes and credit schemes for small-scale farmers.
In summary, therefore, small-scale farmers in SSA are operating in a changing macro-economic environment which is characterized by liberalization, reduced government budgets, lower levels of agricultural production, increased poverty, food insecurity and environmental degradation.
3. THE MICRO-LEVEL CONTEXT
3.1 Small-Scale Farming Households
3.2 Small-scale Aquaculture
3.1 Small-Scale Farming Households
Small-scale farmers in southern and eastern Africa grow a variety of crops for home consumption and for local sales. Cattle and small livestock such as goats and chicken are also usually kept, whilst pigs are only kept in certain localities. In the presence of good markets, households also produce vegetables on a semi-commercial scale. Prior to SAP and encouraged by a system of input subsidies and guaranteed prices, many small-scale farmers cultivated cash crops such as hybrid maize, cotton, groundnuts and tobacco.
In general, however, the majority of farm households maintain a significant, if varying, degree of autonomy from the market as characterized by the share of farm output which is consumed within the household rather than sold (Ellis 1992). Risk avoidance, rather than profit maximization, dominates household decision making and studies have shown that the market responses of small-holders reflect this phenomena (Duncan & Howell 1992). Therefore, the small-scale rural farmer experiences difficult trade offs between a number of goals. These goals are usually, but not always, some or all of the following: higher farm outputs; increased cash; greater food security and less family labour time in farm work.
One of the most important concerns for small-scale farming households is normally the security of household food supplies. This is because in many parts of southern and eastern Africa many of these rural households face one of two types of food insecurity: transitory or chronic. Transitory food insecurity is the result of a temporary decline in a household's access to enough food. This is more common among households in southern and central Africa. Chronic food insecurity is the result of a continuously inadequate diet caused by the persistent inability to acquire enough food. This often occurs in areas subject to severe drought or civil war, for example in Ethiopia and Angola.
One other important characteristic of small-scale farming systems is gender specific demarcation of activities (Duncan & Howell 1992). This gender demarcation varies depending on the level of out-migration and general availability of male labour.
3.2 Small-scale Aquaculture
In the context of southern and eastern Africa, small-scale aquaculture is the culture of fish in earthen ponds. It is characterized by extensive or semi-intensive management. The intensification of the system relates to the application of inputs to the production process. In extensive systems, production is primarily based on availability of natural food in the system, which can be enhanced by the application of relatively low levels of mainly organic fertilizers. In semi-intensive systems the production of natural food in the system is still important, but is increased by the application of higher levels of fertilizers, supplemented by feeds. Small-scale aquaculture is usually a part-time activity, often integrated into overall farm activities and drawing on many of the same resources as other agriculture and animal husbandry activities.
Small-scale aquaculture is a relatively new technology in southern and eastern Africa and as such has faced similar problems to other new agriculture technologies. Production data (albeit poor, as they are also for small-scale rural agriculture), have characterized small-scale aquaculture in southern and eastern Africa by low rates of improved technology adoption, a tendency for ponds to be abandoned or poorly managed, less than optimal productivity and poor sustainability of aquaculture projects (Harrison 1994). Consequently, many of the trends observed in the development of small-scale aquaculture are not unique and solutions may be the same as those for problems in rural and agricultural development.
4. SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE AND AGRICULTURE
4.1 Land and Water
4.2 Labour
4.3 Feeds and Fertilizers
4.4 Capital
As the previous section described, small-scale farming households have diverse farming systems, tend to be risk averse, are likely to suffer from transitory cash shortages and food insecurity. It is within this overall context that the similarities and differences between small-scale agriculture and aquaculture are discussed.
4.1 Land and Water
In extensive and semi-intensive aquaculture the amount of inputs as well as the surface area are the main determinants of total production of a fish pond. Availability of enough land is therefore crucial for the production of fish. In some countries, land is in short supply (e.g. Malawi, Zimbabwe, Rwanda), but in general, most countries in southern and central Africa such as Zambia, Zaire, Tanzania and Mozambique have ample land resources, and agricultural activities are not limited by the availability of land. However, land with a good source of water, necessary for small-scale aquaculture, is scarce in many countries. Suitable land is used for other, often intensive, horticulture activities. For example, in Tanzania, although agricultural land is generally available, land suitable for small-scale aquaculture is used for vegetable gardening (Nilsson & Wetengere 1994). Thus, due to the type of land and water resources required, small-scale aquaculture competes with vegetable
cultivation.
There are, however, some exceptions to this competition between aquaculture and vegetable gardening. In Luapula Province in Zambia the relation between land and aquaculture has taken another direction. Ponds have been constructed in order to claim land. Land is regarded as a common property resource and the construction of ponds ensures the usufruct of the land to the farmer. Ponds were often not managed and sometimes not stocked or even completed. This illustrates that in areas with abundant land and high rainfall, sites suitable for pond construction are seen as a valuable resource, - worthwhile to establish ownership - although the land may only be used later of may ultimately be used for other activities.
4.2 Labour
In general, most small-scale farming households rely entirely on family labour for their agricultural activities. Fanning systems surveys confirm that the demand for labour in the planting and weeding season is the major constraint to the increase in production (Van der Mheen-Sluijer and Van der Mheen, 1988). Although small-scale aquaculture requires some labour, it does not significantly compete for labour during periods of highest labour demand in agriculture. The most labour intensive activity in small-scale aquaculture is pond construction. This is not restricted to a certain time of year and is generally undertaken during periods of light demand on male labour. Extensive and semi-intensive aquaculture production systems do not require much household labour for daily management. However, unequal control of inputs and products within a household can mean that, in some cases, aquaculture places a demand on labour of certain members of a household (such as women), who may
already have a heavy workload.
4.3 Feeds and Fertilizers
Small-scale aquaculture and agriculture tend to use feeds and fertilizers coming from the farm itself. As a result, there is competition for these inputs among the different farm enterprises. Agricultural by-products like maize and rice bran, oil cakes and kitchen leftovers can be used for both fish and animal feeds. In those areas where animals, especially chickens and pigs, are raised, it is sometimes difficult for farmers to allocate the feed to the fish ponds.
Animal manure and compost can be used for fertilizing the pond, the field or the vegetable garden. For those small-scale farmers who use inorganic fertilizers, the removal of subsidies on chemical fertilizers has meant that farmers can afford less, thus increasing the opportunity cost for manure and compost, and increasing the competition amongst different on-farm activities for these inputs. Some of the organic material used for compost to fertilize ponds are also used for feeding farm animals.
4.4 Capital
Little capital is required for small-scale aquaculture. The main capital requirement is for purchases of fingerlings. Capital may also be required for pond construction. In general, however, farmers will only allocate money for the construction of a pond when they clearly understand the production system and the activity has proven successful.
5. INTEGRATING AGRICULTURE AND AQUACULTURE
An integrated farming system is one in which waste material from one enterprise is used to improve the production of another, thus increasing the efficiency of both. As described in the previous sections, small-scale aquaculture relies on on-farm resources and inputs, which have alternative uses on the farm. Aquaculture is therefore already integrated into the farming systems of many rural small-scale African farming households.
There are several distinct integrated production systems with high production potential; many of which have been promoted by various development projects. These include the integration of non-ruminants with fish, such as keeping pigs, chickens or ducks above or next to fish ponds. While this type of integration produces higher yields, it requires both the adoption of aquaculture with all its uncertainties and risks, and the adoption of animal production systems, with which most small-scale farmers in southern and eastern Africa are not acquainted. Thus, promotion of these integrated systems has complicated the uptake of fish farming for many farmers. In an effort to promote systems that obtain high yields, these integrated systems have been driven beyond the means of the small-scale farmer.
This does not mean that integrated systems are not viable for farmers. In fact, the best option for fish fanning is its integration into the farming system, but the existing farming system should be taken as a starting point and not a new system that technically offers the highest production. It is now widely accepted that priority should be given to the development of aquaculture which is thoroughly integrated with the small-scale agricultural activities of the farmer (Micha 1995). Since farming systems vary over even small areas, this means that the aquaculture systems have to be flexible and complement, rather than compete with, other on farm activities. It is therefore not always possible to identify a single system of integration of aquaculture for an entire area.
A good example of successful integration with an existing fanning system can be found in Madagascar. Most farmers have rice fields with flood irrigation. These paddies need little adaptation to make them suitable for rice fish farming. Productivity in these systems is low, 100-150 kg/ha/yr, but due to the appropriateness of the technology the adoption is high, resulting in a high total production (Janssen & Randriamiarana 1993).
In certain areas ponds are constructed in or around vegetable gardens, whereby water from the ponds is used to irrigate the crops. This system does not optimize the productivity of the pond, but due to the fact that it is well integrated into the other farm activities, it is more appropriate than systems which emphasize maximum pond production.
6. MACRO-LEVEL AND MICRO-LEVEL IMPLICATIONS FOR INTEGRATED AQUACULTURE
6.1 Structural Adjustment Programmes
6.2 Privatization of Input Supplies
6.3 Marketing
6.4 Credit
6.5 Income Generation
6.6 Food Security
6.7 Poverty Alleviation
6.8 Environmental Sustainability
6.9 Specific Aquaculture Problems
This section discusses the effects of the macro- and micro-level environment on integrated aquaculture development. This includes the effect of macro-level policies of SAP, privatization of input supplies, marketing and credit as well as the potential contribution of integrated aquaculture to rural development objectives of rural income generation, food security, poverty alleviation and environmental sustainability.
6.1 Structural Adjustment Programmes
One of the direct effects of SAP on the development of integrated aquaculture is the reduction in government budgets. This has caused the retrenchment of government personnel and a reduction in resource allocations to extension services. The retrenchment of government personnel is increasing unemployment rates, predominantly in urban areas. However, in the longer term, high unemployment rates in urban areas may lead to migration of labour back to rural areas. Whilst this will increase the labour available for agricultural production, it will also place increasing pressure on land which is already degraded in many areas.
Unless separate funding is found or the extension service is restructured, the reduction of extension service budgets affects the small-scale farmer the most. This is because governments are more likely to allocate the limited extension resources to crops and activities which yield the highest returns for the country, such as export and cash crops, and will allocate less or no resources to the diverse, complicated and low yielding farming activities of the small-scale farmers.
6.2 Privatization of Input Supplies
In the past, governments have emphasized the production of fingerlings at government-run fish farms for sale to farmers, often at subsidized prices. The system gradually deteriorated as the production of fingerlings and in particular, the timely delivery of these fingerlings to the farmers, became too expensive and difficult to organize. This led to a situation where many farmers became disappointed and thus delayed stocking of their ponds, decreased stocking densities, or abandoned fish farming altogether.
As a possible solution to these problems, and in line with the general macro-economic policy of regarding privatization as the panacea to problems of input supplies, government and donors are now promoting an activity they once discouraged - private fingerling production.
The success of private fingerling production will depend on the demand for fingerlings, the ease of distribution, their price and perhaps most importantly, the willingness and ability of entrepreneurs (including farmers) to become private fingerling producers and suppliers. In some countries, such as Madagascar, the development of private fingerling production and supply has been successful (Jensen 1994). In many southern and eastern African countries, however, provision of inputs by the private sector is more likely to occur in the medium term, once entrepreneurial capacity is built up. In some countries, it is still not clear whether private operators will enter the market or whether there will be effective competition.
Thus, in the short term, reduction in government budgets to operate government fish farms, the removal of input subsidies and the lack of private sector development means that there continue to be shortage of fingerlings in many countries. This is likely to have a negative effect on the development of aquaculture, whether integrated or not.
6.3 Marketing
Extensive farming and livestock systems tend to be less dependent on markets and rural infrastructure. Given the macro-economic setting in many African countries, it is argued that maintaining such systems are rational responses for farmers to the unreliability and unpredictability of these structures. In general, the move towards liberalization and privatization of the markets for agricultural products as a result of SAP has increased uncertainties for small-scale farming households. The dismantling of parastatals, often without an alternative structure to replace them, has meant that small-holders have become deprived of marketing channels for their products, or have, in some cases been subject to monopolistic trading practices. However the marketing of fish, from either capture fisheries or small-scale aquaculture, has never been subject to the same level of marketing control as agriculture and therefore has not been directly affected by SAP policies.
With the exception of areas near capture fisheries, fresh fish is in short supply in many rural areas. Consequently, demand is high and fresh fish attains a relatively high price. Most fish is sold at or near the pond site. Production levels from small-scale aquaculture, in most areas of southern and eastern Africa, are not high enough to market fish further afield. Should fish production levels increase beyond that which can be absorbed by pond-side sales, there are clearly opportunities for combining fish marketing with the marketing of other produce at local markets in terms of sharing transport and reaching target consumers.
With respect to distant markets, unless the fish can be preserved in some way, it is more difficult to integrate fish marketing with other agricultural marketing activities. Fresh fish is more time sensitive than either crops or vegetables and would need to rely on availability of ice, refrigeration and reliable transport in order to reach distant markets in a fresh condition. Improved rural transport and distribution systems would therefore be a pre-requisite.
Where integration of marketing the products of agriculture and aquaculture might be logistically possible, it might not be possible if household members do not wish to integrate marketing activities. Often there may be separate income streams within the household, such that the owner of the fish pond may wish to sell their fish separately.
Finally, it is sometimes argued that better market opportunities will increase the chance for the sustainable uptake of fish farming. However, improved market opportunities also encourage the intensification of the production of horticulture products and thus increase the opportunity costs for labour and land suitable for both ponds and gardens. Whether the development of aquaculture will be affected by a generally improved market situation will depend on the aquaculture knowledge of the farmers and the specific market situation for the separate farm products.
6.4 Credit
In the past, several aquaculture extension projects have provided farmers with credit to start fish farming, although these credit programmes have usually targeted semi-intensive or intensive production systems. In general, repayment records have been very poor. For example, in 1985, the FAO Investment Center provided credit meant for 250 farmers the Central African Republic for the intensification of their fish fanning activities. By the middle of 1989, most of the money set aside for the scheme had been given only 29 farmers and repayment was low (Fulconis 1988). Allocation of credit through a government extension organization also caused considerable anger and jealousy, which discouraged new farmers (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1989).
The availability of credit and capital should therefore not be considered necessary for the development of small-scale aquaculture. Indeed, the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO, NORAD, UNDP, 1987) concluded that the spread of family based aquaculture in rural Africa did not seem to be limited by non-availability of credit. Thus changes in credit availability as a result of SAP or other agricultural and rural development policies is unlikely to have a direct effect on the development of small-scale aquaculture.
6.5 Income Generation
One of the objectives of rural development policies is to generate higher incomes in rural areas. Research shows that small-scale farmers generally try to minimize risks in all of their activities, and do not reduce their household effort in their crop/livestock production when they engage in aquaculture. This has the advantage that the cash income of the household can be increased and economic vulnerability reduced by adding one more source of income (Wijkstrom & Aase 1989). Studies carried out in southern and eastern Africa indicate that small-scale aquaculture offers good potential for income generation and can be a strong incentive for farmers to start fish farming. Furthermore, small-scale farmers also see their pond as a savings account which can be harvested when there is a need for cash.
A socio-economic study in Northwestern Province of Zambia found that most fish farmers sell more than half of their produce, making fish one of their major sources of cash (Wijkstrom & Larsson 1992). In Eastern Province of Zambia, cash income from fish farming was found to be an important incentive for farmers to start fish farming especially in areas where there was an absence of other cash crops in certain areas (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1991). The net returns of a 100 m^2 pond amounted to several months of average farmer income. In the Central African Republic, a survey amongst 606 fish farmers found that an average pond area of 177 m^2 resulted in an income equal to 48 days of regular employment although an average of around 20 working days were invested in aquaculture per year (Lietar 1985). In the Ruvuma Region of Tanzania, fish farming was ranked as the third most important source of income by farmers with fish ponds (Seki & Maly 1993). A study in southern Malawi found
that the integration of fish ponds into the agricultural farming systems had a major impact on the cash income of farmer households (Scholtz & Chimatiro 1996). In Rwanda, fish farming is in strong competition with horticulture for suitable land and fertilizers, but enterprise budget analysis showed that fish farming yielded the highest net returns to land, labour and management. Sweet potatoes produced the highest yield of carbohydrates and soybeans were the least expensive source of protein. Therefore fish were used as a source of income (Thomas et al. 1995).
In all these studies, a small fish pond, managed extensively, was just one part of a larger fanning operation. Often, cash derived from fish farming is not invested in further intensification of the aquaculture operation but into other farming activities (Nilsson & Wetengere 1994). This is an indication that small-scale farmers are, in first instance, motivated to avoid risks.
6.6 Food Security
One of the most important objectives of rural development has been to improve both transitory and chronic food insecurity.
Apart from being an important source of income, small-scale aquaculture also provides fish for home consumption. Fish are not only consumed when the whole pond is harvested but also throughout the year through intermittent harvesting. Fish have an advantage over other livestock because they can be caught and eaten when desired whilst animals such as chickens, goats, and cattle are usually only consumed on special occasions.
In Rwanda, 92% of the farmers consumed fish from their ponds and, of their total production, 28% of the fish was used for home consumption and 56% was sold (Thomas et al. 1995). A study in Southern Malawi (Scholtz & Chimatiro, 1996) has estimated that small-scale fanning households with a fish pond consumed one kilogram offish per week from their fish ponds.
Therefore, fish from small-scale aquaculture can contribute to improved food security, especially transitory food insecurity. However, in the short term this is only likely to be in localized areas, where land and water resources are available. It is feasible that in the medium to longer term, increased production and the development of marketing channels may also contribute to the alleviation of food insecurity in areas where the physical potential for small-scale aquaculture does not exist. With the exception of very localized areas, the contribution of small-scale aquaculture to the alleviation of chronic food insecurity in the short term at least, is likely to be negligible as production levels are too low.
6.7 Poverty Alleviation
A way of categorizing rural poor is:
· some types of female headed households;
· households with old and infirm farmers;
· refugee households;
· households in remote areas far from roads and markets, receiving less inputs including extension;
· households where there are poor soils and rainfall.
Many small-scale farming households fall into these categories. Small-scale aquaculture can contribute to poverty alleviation for some of these categories. Studies have shown differences in the type of farmers which have, so far, taken up small-scale aquaculture.
Many studies indicate that fish farmers are better off than non-fish farmers, and have a better education than the non-fish farmers (Wijkstrom & Aase 1989, Nilsson & Wetengere 1994, Harrison 1993). Conversely, an adoption study on small-scale aquaculture in Eastern Province of Zambia showed that the adopters had a lower income than the non-adopters, which made the incentive for cash from aquaculture more attractive to them (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1991). This was attributed to the extension message which had focused on providing aquaculture information appropriate for all small-scale farmers (rather than better off farmers only) and which was suitable for the integration into the existing farming system. It was concluded that the determining factor for adoption of a new technology was not the financial situation or level of formal education but the appropriateness of the technology and the extension method.
Therefore the potential for aquaculture to contribute to poverty alleviation is good, provided the extension message and the technology is appropriate for the rural poor, and the extension service makes an effort to reach that target group.
6.8 Environmental Sustainability
Environmental degradation is becoming an increasingly bigger problem with effects on the long term sustainability of the resource base. Integrating aquaculture with agriculture may have a positive impact on the ecological sustainability of farming systems. Research carried out by ICLARM (Lightfoot & Pullin 1994) indicate the potential to increase the number of recycling flows on-farm through aquaculture integration. At selected research sites in Ghana, Malawi and the Philippines, ecological sustainability improved after integration, as indicated by increases in bio-resource recycling, species diversity and productive capacity. This was because the pond provided mud and fertile water for use on vegetable gardens and the pond acted as a digester for raw nutrients added to it from other on-farm enterprises such as leaves, manure and cocoa pods (Prein 1994).
Experiences from Asia might also show the way forward for improving environmental sustainability in southern and eastern Africa. In Bangladesh, it has been demonstrated that in rice-integrated pest management with fish culture can eliminate pesticides entirely, improve rice yields and provide a harvest offish (Kamp et al. 1993). Rice-azolla systems are also common in many parts of Asia. The fish are beneficial because they eat weeds, algae and insect pests, and help to keep disease carriers in check whilst the azolla makes more nitrogen available compared to systems without fish.
6.9 Specific Aquaculture Problems
In southern and eastern Africa, aquaculture is a relatively new activity for most farmers. Fish farming is an activity that can not in all aspects be compared with other farming activities, and has specific problems. Farmers are often unfamiliar with the construction offish ponds and this was mentioned to be an important constraint in aquaculture in Zimbabwe (Binali 1996). Theft and predation are common problems. Although some farmers have identified techniques to overcome these problems, theft and predation are still mentioned as the main problem by fish farmers in Zambia and Tanzania (Murnyak & Mafwenga 1996). Despite these problems and risks, fish fanning was ranked as a relatively low risk activity by farmers in Tanzania (Nilsson & Wetengere 1994), and considered much less risky then most other agricultural activities.
7. AGRICULTURE AND AQUACULTURE EXTENSION APPROACHES
7.1 Transfer of Technology Approach
7.2 Target Group Approach
7.3 Participatory Extension Approach
It is clear from the preceding sections that aquaculture, integrated with small-scale agriculture can contribute to the realization of rural development objectives. However, this greatly depends on the extension approach, especially whether adequate and appropriate information is made available to small-scale farmers.
Before discussing current extension services and the opportunities and constraints for establishing an integrated aquaculture extension service, it is important to critically review the approaches which are used to carry out research and extension in both agriculture and aquaculture. The following section describes the various approaches, drawing upon examples from aquaculture.
7.1 Transfer of Technology Approach
The best known approach to agriculture and aquaculture extension is the transfer-of-technology approach, which is essentially a top-down approach. In this approach, scientists attempt to find solutions to what they perceive to be the farmers' major technological problems. Research is then carried out, usually at research stations. For example, in aquaculture, it has often been assumed that low production levels have led to discouragement and subsequently abandonment of fish farming. Consequently, aquaculture research has focused on increased fish production. Several packages have been developed which include one or several of the following components: minimum pond size, pre-selected fish species, integration with animal husbandry, pre-determined management practices, defined production cycle and harvesting techniques.
Once a possible technical solution is identified, it is developed into a recommendation for farmers to follow. Extension workers are then requested to disseminate this 'new knowledge' to the farmers, in the expectation that the newly recommended practice will diffuse amongst the farmers. Aquaculture projects have often begun by making technology available to farmers. However, when fish farming was not adopted at a rate felt necessary, incentives and encouragement were put in place like the provision of fish feeds, fingerlings, associated animals, tools, marketing facilities, credit etc. Adoption rates and fish yields increased but once the project support was gone these packages of technologies were no longer applied. A good example of this was seen when the "Projet Vulgarisation de la Pisciculture" in the Central African Republic came to an end. Farmers who wanted to produce fish for the market, disposed of some of their ponds when they no longer received fish feed on
credit. The number of ponds they kept was determined by the amount of manure and fish feed they could pay for themselves. Those farmers who mainly produced fish for home consumption and thus were not worried about the size of the fish, kept their ponds and minimized their inputs. Their fish yields could have been improved by using on-farm inputs but these practices were no longer known since the various projects had promoted the purchasing of inputs (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1989).
Typically, under this approach, farmers are viewed as ignorant and treated as passive receivers of expertise from outside sources. Specialists in the research and extension services define what is worth knowing. This leads to a situation where the attitudes and behaviour needed for rapport and exchange of ideas and information between farmers and research and extension workers are absent.
The Training and Visit (T&V) system typifies this approach and has become the most significant agriculture extension system used in many countries. The system aims at changing production technologies used by the majority of farmers through provision of advice from well-trained extension workers to individual farmers. The farmers are selected on the basis of the likelihood of adopting new technologies. The system relies on these contact farmers who spread the information to other farmers.
The T&V system was developed in Turkey in 1967, successfully used in countries like India and subsequently used as a blueprint in other countries. However, the situation in other countries was not the same as in India nor was it always properly analyzed before the introduction of the system. In many other developing countries there is a lack of trained agriculturists, while staff with higher training demand higher salaries and are usually not motivated to stay in the rural areas (Van den Ban & Hawkin 1988). In addition, extension workers often have a low level of basic training. As a result, the lowest trained and poorly paid staff are those who are in contact with the farmers. They are expected to give advice on all aspects of agriculture to farmers and ensure that the information from farmers is channelled up into the system.
A review of the T&V system in Zambia noted that the amount of information to be disseminated is too much to grasp for both the extension workers and the farmers (IAS, UNZA 1995). It also found that the system was very rigid in the sense that the extension workers cover many topics but are not well prepared to deal with issues of major concern to the farmers. Moreover, the majority of the farmers, the least well-off, were excluded, either by selective contact or by the inappropriateness of the packages. Extension workers were encouraged to select typical, but responsive, farmers as contact farmers for their areas. Often the contact farmers were found to be men with more formal education and larger farms than non-contact farmers. The resource constraints faced by many of the non-contact farmers impeded the adoption of many new technologies. Additionally, extension workers also felt that they were being policed by their supervisors to achieve targets (such as the number of
meetings held) rather than being evaluated on whether they had transferred any relevant information to farmers.
However, there are situations where the T&V system has been effective. This has been when conditions for intensification of production existed, when inputs could be easily purchased and when markets were guaranteed e.g. cotton producing areas in Zambia. Information and necessary inputs were provided as a package to small-scale farmers by the cotton industry. This system is only sustainable when these conditions are maintained.
7.2 Target Group Approach
The extension approach that takes cognizance of the fact that rural communities comprise a diverse audience of farmers, is known as the target group approach. It has taken its name from the fact that in the execution of its extension work, it specifically aims at one or several categories of farmers, rather than at the farming population as a whole. Working with different categories of farmers means that the extension workers have detailed knowledge about the actual situations of categories of people.
Parallels can be drawn with the commercial practice of product development. This is the design and pre-testing of products for the market, an activity usually based on experience with, and systematic research of, the market as well as analysis of the consumers which make up the main segments of that market (Roling 1982).
Many aquaculture extension services design two types of aquaculture packages which take into account farmers' differential access to land, water, labour, inputs, capital, markets, and information. Information on extensive aquaculture was disseminated to anybody, regardless of their means of production. The more intensive techniques of aquaculture were designed for larger-scale and more market-oriented farmers. Often a list of minimum resources needed to implement the package, was drawn up, whereupon extension workers tried to identify suitable farmers. For example a FAO aquaculture project in Zambia propagated a production system with pigs and Peking ducks on a 500 m^2 pond, and tried to target emerging farmers in Zambia (Aase & Mumba 1987). In the Central African Republic, the promotion of ponds ranging between 600 and 1200 m^2 associated with pigs and chickens was aimed at slightly more advanced farmers (Lietar 1985). In Côte d'Ivoire an intensive system of monosex tilapia
culture was promoted which included 5 fish ponds. The "Projet de développement de la Pisciculture en Milieu Rural" aimed at young men who could afford to invest one year of work to complete the construction of that system (Galbreath & Ziehi 1992).
Although the target group approach implies that information about the farmers is available, it still follows of the same sequence of first developing an aquaculture package and then finding the "right" farmers to disseminate the information to.
7.3 Participatory Extension Approach
Over the last decade there has been a growing awareness of the inadequacies of conventional approaches to agricultural and aquacultural research and extension. Participatory extension strategies have been advocated as a remedy for low-impact extension. However, few people have attempted to describe what it entails, how extensionists should implement it, what the consequences are for training, and the impact on government departments and other implementing agencies and donors.
Table 1: A typology of participation: how people participate on development programmes and projects
Typology
Characteristics of each type
1. Passive participation
People participate by being told what is going to happen or has already happened. It is a unilateral announcement by an administration or project management without any listening to people's responses. The information being shared belongs only to external professionals.
2. Participation in information giving
People participate by answering questions posed by extractive researchers using questionnaire surveys or similar approaches. People do not have the opportunity to influence proceedings, as the findings are neither shared nor checked for accuracy.
3. Participation by consultation
People participate by being consulted and external agents listen to views. These external agents define both problems and solutions, and may modify these in the light of people's responses. Such a consultative process does not concede any share in decision making and professionals are under no obligation to take on board people's views.
4. Participation for material incentives
People participate by providing resources, for example labour, in return for food, cash or other material incentives. Much on-farm research falls in this category, as farmers provided the fields but are not involved in experimentation or the process of learning. It is very common to see this called participation, yet people have no stake in prolonging activities when the incentives end.
5. Functional participation
People participate by forming groups to meet predetermined objectives related to the project, which can involve the development or promotion of externally initiators and facilitators, but may become self-dependent.
6. Interactive participation
People participate in joint analysis, which leads to action plans and the formation of new local institutions or the strengthening of existing ones. It tends to involve interdisciplinary methodologies that seek multiple perspectives, and make use of systematic and structured learning processes. These groups take control over local decisions and so people have a stake in maintaining structures or practices.
7. Self-mobilization
People participate by taking initiatives independent of external institutions to change systems. They develop contacts with external institutions for resources and technical advice they need, but retain control over how resources are used. Such self-initiated mobilization and collective action may or may not challenge existing inequitable distributions of wealth and power.
(Source: Pretty 1995)
It is clear from this typology that the term participation can be employed, even if it does not necessarily have to lead to a change in the approach of a programme. If the objective of a programme is sustainable development, then nothing less than functional participation will suffice.
The dilemma of aquaculture departments and projects is that their role is to promote aquaculture, although that may not be the priority or a perceived need of small-scale farmers. Interventions are often discrete; for example, an aquaculture extension service is not going to solve fertilizer distribution problems or tackle disease problems farmers may have with their crops. Hence, the initiative of introducing the concept of fish farming often comes from an external organization, not from the people themselves. However, once the idea has been raised, an equitable relationship between farmers and extensionists could develop through the establishment of a dialogue.
A pilot project in Zambia used group and individual extension methods to share information (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1989). For example, a slide show was used to discuss general issues concerning fish farming. Instead of giving a standard talk or explanation, the moderator tried to provoke a discussion through asking questions with each slide, encouraging discussion amongst the audience. This interaction gave the extensionist an opportunity to learn about the farmers' situation and helped to create a mutual background of information. During individual farmer visits an exchange of information took place which always followed the same procedure. Farmers gave information about the resources they were willing to divert to fish farming and their aims (in terms of number and size of ponds, intensity), upon which a fish fanning system was worked out together with the extensionist.
Extension agents were used to deliver technical packages to farmers and did not always find it easy to be a facilitator. It required a thorough knowledge of the principles of aquaculture to adapt it to the local situation as well as skills to facilitate communication. Their limited, mainly theoretical, training in extension combined with their uncertainty regarding technical matters and their assumed authority in the field led to a rigid attitude.
The successful use of a participatory extension approach relies heavily on the motivation and ingenuity of the field workers. To bring about the desired change in attitude and extension methods by extension staff, a thorough training and restructuring of the extension organization is needed.
8. EXISTING EXTENSION SERVICES
8.1 Agricultural Extension Services
8.2 Aquaculture Extension Services
8.3 Structural Considerations of Extension Services
Although research and extension have been identified as important factors influencing agricultural growth, these services have not been effective enough to introduce relevant agricultural and livestock technology on a significant scale (Cleaver 1993). This section describes the most common extension services used in agriculture and aquaculture and the problems they face.
8.1 Agricultural Extension Services
In many countries, agriculture extension services use the T&V system. An ideal T&V system requires regular contact between farmers and the extension workers and between supervisors and extension workers. This requires a large and mobile organization. However, in most southern and eastern Africa countries, extension services are under-resourced so that many of the essential characteristics of a T&V system are not in place. In addition, a T&V system is expensive to maintain, especially in countries where farmers are difficult to reach because of their scattered or remote locations. Thus in those countries which are constrained by budgetary allocations, limited extension effort tends to be devoted to those farmers and crops which provide greatest contribution to export earnings or Gross National Product (GNP). Small-scale farmers, with diverse farming systems and few cash crops, scattered all over the country, tend not to receive priority.
Moreover, the structure of the T&V system has contributed to the failure of extension messages and research in dealing with issues of major concern to small-scale farmers. T&V has tended to deeply institutionalize extension's top-down hierarchy, so preventing extension systems from being learning organizations. Bureaucrats liked the system, because it could be used to hold staff accountable, but higher level staff and research scientists have severely inhibited the upward flow of information, despite early intentions to do so. It is therefore questionable whether the T&V system, as it currently functions, can deal with the changes that are needed to assist small-scale farmers adequately.
8.2 Aquaculture Extension Services
The organization of aquaculture extension services is normally hierarchical and relatively small. In order of seniority, these include aquaculturists, technicians, and field workers. In many countries they have the arduous task to reach the mass of scattered, small producers. In response to this problem of limited resources (staff and budget) and scattered farmers, three strategies are often employed:
· Integration of aquaculture as an activity within the services of an other ministry or department. For example in Zambia, the Department of Fisheries and the Department of Agriculture have collaborated in certain areas. The aquaculturist and fisheries assistants function as subject matter specialists at provincial and district level. Their tasks are to prepare fish farming messages and train the agricultural staff at all levels of the T&V system in aquaculture. This collaboration is not officially supported at departmental or ministerial level.
· The use of lay-extension workers, i.e. fish farmers. They are given some training and incentives so as to be able to serve as extension aids or animateurs. An aquaculture extension project in the Central African Republic trained 89 animateurs. They received a bicycle and a monthly allowance paid by UNICEF, in the anticipation that the government would incorporate them into their service after three years. The majority of the animateurs were not established fish farmers but young men who had just finished school. They were not always respected by the fish farmers who complained that instead one of them should have been trained. After three years, the animateurs were not employed by the government and 85% of them abandoned their ponds for other activities or employment (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1989).
· The use of farmer groups. Groups of farmers are organized to enable discussion of certain topics and to enable demonstration of new techniques. These discussions and demonstrations take place at the farm of one of the fish farmers. Farmers who have experience with a certain technique are chosen for these demonstrations. This has proven to be an effective way to disseminate aquaculture information in Kenya (Campbell 1995).
Aquaculture extension, either by a government department or by a donor funded project, always faces the problem that farmers are only assisted with aquaculture. This activity is usually not the first priority of the small-scale farmer. Extension agents often find it difficult to assist farmers with other farming activities even though they may be related to fish farming. Sometimes it is also difficult for aquaculture extensionists to accept that farmers do not give a high priority to fish farming. This situation can be frustrating for the extension worker who has to (or wants to) have a certain number of fish ponds constructed every year and to the farmer who wants more information than the extension worker is able to give. For example, motivated aquaculture extension workers in the Central African Republic complained that the farmers had not finished the construction of the pond (although it had been pegged and advice provided), as they have been working in their fields
(Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1989).
Another problem facing the aquaculture/fisheries extension service in many countries is that their workers also have to carry out monitoring and enforcement activities (Satia 1989). These duties often have a negative impact on the extension activities. For example, in Benin, Gabon and the Central African Republic extension workers are game or forest wardens; in Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and Zambia they enforce fisheries regulations.
The Thematic Evaluation (FAO, NORAD, UNDP 1987) pointed out that governments often do not have the financial means to maintain aquaculture extension services initiated by donor funded projects. It concluded that a T&V System for aquaculture should, wherever it is not absolutely necessary, be avoided because of its high cost.
8.3 Structural Considerations of Extension Services
Previous sections often referred to the poor performance of extension services. What needs to be said is that the performance and morale of extension staff are largely structurally determined. It is important to identify these issues at this stage since an alternative extension approach can only make a difference to small-scale farmers if successfully implemented by extension services. If positive results of pilot projects are to be replicated on a larger scale, some of these elements within extension organizations need to be redressed.
Some of the frequently heard problems which apply to both agriculture and aquaculture extension organizations are the following.
· Nearly all extension services are government-run, thus bound by the standard procedures, rules and precedents of public administration which tend to lead to slow response to field needs and to inflexibility. Departments are bureaucratically structured because of the need to allocate, financially control, and account for a wide range of items to a large number of individuals (Jiggins 1977).
· The fisheries officers are generally responsible for administration, policy and planning, while technical officers are specifically responsible for operations (Satia 1989).
· Extension services are typically not involved in the planning of resource allocation or policy priorities. They tend to be regarded solely as the executive arm of decision-makers located elsewhere or at a higher level. Priorities and financial allocations are thus handed down to the districts for implementation, however well or ill they suit the particular needs of farmers in the area. Such centralization parallels the attempt to extend packages across the board, disregarding both geo-climatic and socio-economic variation within the locality.
· There tends to be confusion between the regulatory (enforcing fisheries regulations, see section 8.2), educational (demonstrations, etc.), and service (fingerling distribution) functions of the extension services; and there is a corresponding weakness and confusion of management styles and structures. Management within extension services tends to be inward-looking rather than directed toward servicing staff in the field, or providing necessary support, encouragement, or supervision.
· Traditionally, field staff are controlled and their performance evaluated by measuring the measurable (i.e. number of visits made, total pond area, fingerlings distributed). These quantitative tasks can be most easily met by visiting larger farmers. Moreover, fish production figures are hard to obtain and it is therefore common practice to multiply the pond area with an assumed average yield of fish per hectare per year (often around 2,000 kg/ha/yr). Whether or not farmers actually produce fish in a sustainable way cannot be assessed. Operationally, these are not very useful measures of either effort or impact, the indices that should be of real concern to supervisors.
· An important impediment to reaching the remote, scattered, invisible small-scale farmers is that prospects for junior staff are usually governed by paper qualifications rather than field competence and experience. Promotion criteria tend to relate to seniority, length of service, office-based skills, visibility to the superior management. It becomes more important to please immediate superiors than to carry out immediate field tasks, to fulfill 'paper' objectives than to achieve results on the ground. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in Africa South of the Sahara carried out in 1989 mentioned that extension agents, particularly field workers, have limited opportunities for career advancement (Satia 1989). This was being attributed to the lack of training institutions in many countries and to the lack of basic qualifications to pursue training outside the country. Even those who had the opportunity to train externally, failed to further their career
advancement because of a lack of follow-up by the institutions concerned; for example, the failure to issue the trainees with transcripts of their results, and diplomas or certificates of qualification.
· Salary structures are governed by nationally, or regionally, determined norms and grading; individual effort and competence is not directly, or even often, related to reward. Monetary compensation is not necessarily the prime component in job satisfaction and motivation. Yet where financial resources are scarce, very little effort is usually made to seek alternative material benefits for junior extension workers that might at least ease resentment and dissatisfaction at seeing effort and application go unrewarded (Jiggins 1977).
· Terms of service are often as unsatisfactory as remuneration and promotion. Though junior staff usually have a considerable degree of security of employment, staff transfers can be very frequent. The constant movement of staff is damaging to the morale of the staff and to the achievement of objectives (Jiggins 1977).
· Expectations and motivations of field staff are rarely adequately considered. Most efforts and resources provided by either government or donors, tend to concentrate on the provision of physical inputs and the mobilization of technological resources, rather than in the review of field staff management. Yet if the organization fails at this level, all the prior effort is wasted.
9. OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS FOR AN INTEGRATED EXTENSION SERVICE
9.1 Opportunities
9.2 System Overload
9.3 Institutional Barriers
9.4 Current Extension Approach
The previous section described the problems of maintaining a separate aquaculture extension service. Indeed, it has been acknowledged by many governments that the unification of extension services (agriculture, livestock, aquaculture) is a good idea, but the difficult issue is to determine the scale and level of this integration. This section discusses the opportunities and constraints of integrating the aquaculture extension service with agriculture.
9.1 Opportunities
As has been illustrated, sustainable small-scale aquaculture implies the integrated use of farm resources so as to meet both productivity and sustainability goals. Yet, most external agencies, both governmental and non-governmental, are organized along sectoral lines. Aquaculture research and extension professionals tend to be narrowly trained and tend not to work in a multi-disciplinary fashion. Hence it is difficult for farmers and extension staff to discuss and effectively improve upon their farming systems as a whole.
The farmers have to contact many points to get their permits and information (e.g. agriculture, animal husbandry, forest, aquaculture, fisheries). However, it would be more practical if an extension organization would look more outward to the client system and try to "service" the farmers' total requirements.
9.2 System Overload
It has been recognized that it is possible to identify the various elements of the farming system and decide what skills are needed, but there is also the problem of overloading the system (Bagchee 1994). This overloading is especially obvious at the level of the extension worker. The extension worker is often poorly trained, not well equipped for his/her tasks and has to give advice on many different aspects of agriculture. In many countries the system does not provide incentives or promotion prospects for taking up extra responsibilities.
9.3 Institutional Barriers
Aquaculture extension and research are often independent from agriculture extension and research. In most countries aquaculture falls under a separate department and sometimes even under different ministries. Although a more integrated extension approach towards rural development may be beneficial, collaboration between departments and ministries is often difficult. The institutional barriers preventing aquaculture from becoming an integrated part of agriculture extension may be difficult to overcome. Staff fear loosing their jobs and the existing power structures are threatened by the change. The fact that extension becomes more effective and efficient is not always a sufficient incentive to accept collaboration and integration with other institutes. As one senior aquaculture staff in Zambia argued against this integration: the collaboration with the Department of Agriculture will provide you with transport to go into the field, but they will never buy you a vehicle.
In addition, the integration of existing development projects with other rural development projects faces the same resistance. The fear that the amalgamation of aquaculture and agriculture will lead to the neglect of aquaculture may, in some cases, be justified. It can only work when there is a clear commitment from both sides to collaborate.
9.4 Current Extension Approach
Since many countries use the T&V system, the development of small-scale aquaculture through this system will face the same problems as presently experienced by agriculture extension. It is therefore argued that, rather than integrating aquaculture into a system with serious shortcomings, a new extension approach must be found and implemented by a different type of extension service
10. ELEMENTS OF A NOVEL EXTENSION SYSTEM
10.1 Approach
10.2 Organization
10.3 Training
The previous sections have shown that sustainable small-scale aquaculture can only be achieved if it is integrated within existing farming systems, increasing the diversity of the enterprises within the small-scale farms, and reducing risks. Whilst the importance of effective research and extension is acknowledged as being critically important for agricultural and rural development, the previous sections show that existing extension approaches and services have not been effective. Top-down approaches, separate aquaculture extension services and the promotion of pre-determined packages of so-called integrated aquaculture are clearly not working. For the potential of integrated small-scale aquaculture to be fully realized and positively contribute to the attainment of rural development objectives, there have to be changes in the extension approach, message, methods and organization. This section proposes a new extension approach.
10.1 Approach
Small-scale aquaculture cannot be conceptualized as a purely technical activity. Opportunities available to different people for aquaculture not only depend on environmental conditions, access to means of production and their farming systems but also on their social relationships within and beyond the household. This will influence the interest in aquaculture as perceived by the various target groups. For example, an adoption study carried out in Zambia revealed that villagers felt morally obliged to participate in the construction of a village pond after the village headman had proposed to build a communal pond. However, they themselves did not see any benefits so they started looking for excuses for their absence since they could not openly let him down. Likewise, farmers who wanted to construct a family pond felt it was indecent to do so before the village headman had built his own since it would have been interpreted as challenging the headman (Van der Mheen-Sluijer
1991a).
It may also explain that not all farmers' priorities are production-oriented as is sometimes believed. Aquaculture technology should be reworked to fit the farming production strategies, resource imperatives and social desires of a farm family. For example, it is often stated that farmers lack the knowledge concerning a six months' production cycle. However, findings show that farmers often do have the knowledge but do not necessarily apply this knowledge because they may see aquaculture as a 'savings account', i.e. sell fish when they need money or to 'save' fish for times when relish is in short supply, or do not want to drain the pond because of a lack of fingerlings, water or inputs to fertilize the pond (personal observations in Zambia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe). Some farmers have also expressed concern that a batch harvest attracts many people and they are expected to distribute part of their harvest amongst relatives and friends. Another reason why farmers may not see
the need to harvest after six months is that although they were always taught that there is a risk of overpopulation after six months which may lead to a reduction in productivity, they knew they were regularly fishing in their pond and thereby decreasing the stocking density. During many years this practice of intermittent harvesting by fish farmers has been discouraged by extension services so that farmers were often reluctant to give accurate details on catches and fishing frequency.
Therefore, if aquaculture is to be integrated into farming systems one must also understand its interactions with the surrounding physical, socio-cultural and institutional environment. This analysis as well as the planning of improvements should involve farm families and rural communities. This process will also expose the multiple objectives of the people concerned (FAO 1989). Working with people or facilitating them to work with each other requires a fundamentally different approach to research and extension. The methodological challenge is not necessarily that of how to produce more or better information. The idea is to improve the capacity to analyze and learn from each other. To do so, the emphasis must shift from expanding the repertoire of methods to convey predetermined aquaculture production techniques to establishing a basis for dialogue, through which ideas are shared and learning occurs. This creation of a shared perspective on the problem, and help in
developing decision-making capacity to deal with it, is perhaps the most distinguishing characteristic of facilitation. Collaboration between researchers, extensionists and farming households is regarded as a process of mutual learning between colleagues with different contributions to make.
Participatory programmes also focus on facilitating exchange between farmers and enhancing their organizational capacity to diagnose and solve problems themselves. Previously, transfer of knowledge between farmers was discouraged because it was assumed that farmers were unable to provide the correct knowledge to each other. For example, farmers were told to wait for extension workers who would come and peg a pond for them because the procedure of the extension service was that farmers could not select a suitable site for their ponds. Likewise, extension workers would deliver the right number of fingerlings to stock a pond without explaining how to calculate the 'exact number'. Nevertheless, experience has shown that fish farmers do transfer a lot of information to other farmers. In Tanzania, knowledge about fish farming was most often obtained from other fish farmers (Nilsson & Wetengere 1994). In Eastern Province of Zambia the majority of the fish farmers (93%) had received
advice from other fish farmers, while only a minority received advice through the official extension channels (van der Mheen-Sluijer 1995). Another study carried out in Zambia found that, although fish farming extension had been intense in an area, and the project was an important source of information, most fish farmers identified an other fish farmer in the area as the most important source of information.
With all the problems extension services are experiencing in reaching small-scale farmers, farmer-to-farmer extension is now receiving considerable attention because it has proven to be an important multiplier in the number of recipients that can be reached. In spite of this advantage, there are shortcomings of this communication channel. When people pass on messages it is likely that some distortion will occur which will worsen as one goes along the chain. Furthermore, if the first fish farmer in an area adopts 'wrong' practices, others are likely to follow the 'wrong' example. In Eastern Province, Zambia, it was found that farmers copy what they see without necessarily knowing why things are done in a certain way. One would expect that an opinion leader discusses more or less the same topics (e.g. details of pond construction, composting) with all the farmers who ask him/her for advice. However, several people who had talked about fish farming with the same opinion leader,
but did not live in the same villages, had adopted different practices. If the first fish farmer had a well constructed pond, others in the same village would also build their ponds correctly. If the first fish farmer had no compost crib in the pond, it would be less likely for fellow villagers to practice composting. The situation in neighbouring villages could be completely different despite the fact that they had received advice from the same person (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1995).
Two conclusions can be drawn from these studies. Firstly, whether intended or unintended, farmer-to-farmer extension is taking place on a large scale and is very effective in reaching remote, small-scale farmers. The development of local networks to disseminate information should thus be encouraged. The quality of the knowledge transferred should be carefully monitored since distortion of information may lead to adoption of wrong practices which may be counterproductive in the long run. Secondly, one could infer, based on the results of the above-mentioned studies, that to have one well-constructed and well-managed fish pond per village is enough to trigger the multiplier effect. Even if the 'introduction of this first fish pond' is done through a careful process of exchange of information with the farming household so that it fits within their farming system and is in line with their resources and objectives, it does not necessarily mean that others will be able to copy the
right practices. Farmers should also understand the basics of aquaculture, e.g. know the why's of a sloping site, sloping and compacted dikes, stocking densities, composting, production cycle, etc. This knowledge will enable them to adapt aquaculture to their own situation. It thus requires (a) discussion partner(s) who is (are) willing to share this knowledge with the community to which he/she belongs.
An example in Eastern Province, Zambia can be used to illustrate this point. A school teacher had been envied by many people for his fish. Since he had used hired labour for pond construction and cement to line his dikes, small-scale farmers who had seen his ponds were discouraged to copy his fish farming experiences (hence the study's outcome that seeing a fish pond had a negative effect on the adoption of fish farming). When the project introduced fish farming encouraging people to use only locally available resources, people started discussing fish farming issues with the teacher, while before they had only looked at the ponds. His position as an opinion leader gave him status in the community but at the same time he was afraid that the uptake of fish farming by others might interfere with his own enterprise and he started to convey incorrect information.
This example shows the importance of the social context and power relations in patterns of knowledge transmission. If an extension service wants to build on social networks for information exchange, it is important to know how the sharing, spreading, and transformation of knowledge takes place. This can be done through network analysis. It tries to expose patterns of communication by checking whether farmers obtain all the necessary information on aquaculture from one or several sources and how they are related to these sources (e.g. belong to same village, clan, age-grade association, church, youth or women's group, informal beer-brewing group, labour-exchange societies, farmer groups and so on). An important aspect in this analysis is to relate these networks of information exchanges to the potential users of this information. For example, it has often been stated that women and children are usually responsible for the feeding of the fish. Do they discuss these issues with
others who are responsible for the same tasks? In other words, can this informal extension system overcome the pitfalls of formal extension systems which more often than not address men and expects them to pass on the information to their wives and children?
These social networks can be taken as an entry point for a field worker when introducing aquaculture. Local groups or organizations have in common the prevalence of face-to-face interpersonal relationships, which are more frequent and intense within small groups. They are thus an ideal forum for discussing farmers' opportunities to integrate aquaculture into their farming systems. However, an important shortcoming of traditional institutions is that in highly stratified societies, the existing institutional arrangements are inequitable. Therefore, it may not be the best representative of local people (Pretty 1995). If it is found that local elites or the better-off farmers dominate these existing local groups, it is better to form entirely new ones. Another reason why it may not be suitable to build upon already established groups, is that uptake of aquaculture will be scattered. Existing groups may not be able to cope with this wide distribution of members. This is an
important difference with agriculture where many farmers grow the same type of crops.
New groups may thus have to be formed for the purpose of exchanging information on aquaculture. Care must be taken that these new institutions are not imposed on local people. The usual approach to establishing rural organizations, calling a meeting, passing a constitution, electing officers, etc.- does not yield sustainable local capabilities. Uphoff (1994) identifies several distinct elements in the group formation and development process. These were slightly adapted here to suit our purposes.
The creation of communication channels stimulated by field workers who have been appropriately recruited, trained and deployed.
· Start with an informal organization. Let farmers develop fish farming first, then focus on solving particular problems, like the supply of fingerlings. Especially in areas with seasonal ponds, it is important that farmers secure their supply of fingerlings. If the farmers live within walking or cycling distance and the market for fingerlings is large enough, someone may want to specialize in the production of fingerlings versus table-size fish.
· Importance of small groups at the base. The fact that people know each other creates opportunities for collective action and mutual assistance, and for mobilizing resources on a self-sustaining basis.
· Make provision for horizontal diffusion. As fish farmer organizations get involved in research and extension and in other means for improving their situation, it is important that horizontal, farmer-to-farmer channels of communication and learning be established. Visits of fish farmer-representatives to other fish farming groups can be very beneficial.
A working collaboration between field staff and, either already established local groups or newly formed 'fish farmer groups' systems seem likely to offer the most widespread and durable opportunity for extending extension. An extension service should send out a field worker to consult with farmers, identify aquaculture potential, and build groups. Whether extension staff will have to deal with groupings of farmers directly or through some intermediary at village level depends on the local situation.
If the extension staff work with a farmer representative, care should be taken when mobilizing this type of 'leadership'. Farmer representatives should be chosen by their groups not by election but by consensus. If the representatives must be acceptable to all members, factional leaders are less likely to come forward. If groups have already started working informally, everyone will know who within their group is serious about improving fish farming performance. Those selected will feel accountable to every member, as all had assented to their selection. Representatives should rotate on a regular basis, so that many farmers get the experience of facilitating groups. It also limits the risks of one person trying to control the group and thereby trying to boost his/her status. The terms of reference should be prepared by the members of the group.
An additional advantage of group extension is that it is culturally more accepted that the dominantly male extension services, only 3% of extension staff in Africa are female and are usually found in the junior ranks (van der Mheen & Sen 1994), use group methods when discussing (fish) farming with women than individual extension methods. It is impossible to say, without knowledge of the particular local circumstances, whether men and women want to have separate or mixed groups to discuss fish farming issues.
The collaboration between extension staff and farmer groups should include the identification, implementation, and evaluation of relevant trials. For example, a rapid rural appraisal carried out in Luapula Province, Zambia, revealed that farmers had experimented to feed Tilapia rendalli with several types of 'bush leaves' and compared growth performance. A farmer also explained how he had experimented with different types of polyculture, comparing Oreochromis macrochir growth rates for different combinations of, Tilapia rendalli and sparrmanii (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1991b). Farmers often conduct their own research and compare results. The problem is that researchers sometimes do not understand or even accept that farmers are experimenters.
In conclusion, a participatory use of extension methods in itself is not enough to bring about sustainable aquaculture or agriculture. Flexible and long-term extension approaches that build upon local knowledge and skills, reinforce local village organizations, involve villagers in technology generation and use of local farmer representatives for appraisal, planning, implementation and monitoring are needed.
Given such grassroots organization, extension could make use of a great variety of group extension communication methods. Instead of being primarily responsible for providing technological information, the extension agent should teach farmers how to analyze their situation, how problems can be solved and how the appropriate institutes can be contacted for assistance. But developing methods for setting up the grassroots organizations itself is still a matter of uncertainty. Actual experience is scarce. The institutional development at farmers level should become an important aspect of rural development.
10.2 Organization
One must admit from the preceding sections that most extension organizations are not exactly suited for implementing our alternative extension approach.
To implement a participatory approach successfully, the field workers should have considerable communication and motivation skills, in addition to some technical understanding of agriculture and aquaculture. They need to be supported by a network of specialists. They need training to help rural people to organize, to formulate priorities, and to 'pull down' required assistance from a network of specialists and local experimental stations.
A re-organized extension structure should thus use a smaller but much better qualified staff than is currently the case. This staff will have to use the local social network of the farmers to further disseminate the extension messages, and will need extension material appropriate for such an approach.
Such attempts to introduce decentralized, 'bottom-up' approaches must be complemented by strong 'top-down' commitment and a very clear, shared view of the mission of the organization, filtering through its culture at all levels. Discretion over policy adjustments, choice of local organizational forms, allocation of financial resources at the district level would allow the extension organization to respond to the multiplicity of farmer needs. The decision on what kind of research will be carried out and what extension messages will contain will be no longer determined by the departments but is decided in discussion with the farmers.
In order to be able to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness and impact of the work of the field staff, rather than report on quantitative tasks executed by them, supervisors will have to work much more closely with individual staff, should spend a lot of their time in the field with their junior staff and their clients, to know what is possible for each staff member to do within the local conditions, to help them draw up a realistic work plan, to encourage them when they feel inadequate and reprimand them when they fail to keep to work plans. It means that supervision will have to be an active process of leadership, not a paper procedure, and that evaluation be made against mutually discussed and established standards of required performance.
In short, a far more personal, in-the-field management and support of staff and a review of recruitment, training and promotion procedures combined with a raise in status of extension work and field staff would considerably assist the problem of 'motivating junior staff'.
A participatory extension approach also requires a rethinking of conventional project programming procedures. Instead of leaping into project formulation from the start, the process must start with a slow and patient building up of village-level capacity through skills training and institutional support. This phase requires an initial investment in human resource development. It must precede formal project planning and then be followed by participatory planning, implementation and evaluation. Physical and financial targets should be drawn up in detail at this stage. Conventional tools of appraisal and economic analysis can be used in conjunction with analysis of institutional development.
Although some of the design criteria for an alternative extension organization could thus be formulated, much work remains to be done in this respect, while there seems to be considerable reluctance in this matter.
10.3 Training
The integration of aquaculture within existing farming systems, implies that field workers are expected to cope with a range of farm level problems, though most often they have been taught only a narrow package of technical advice and inputs. Moreover, they were taught to take a known technology to rural communities and enlist their co-operation.
The alternative extension approach requires professionals to act as facilitators and trainers rather than working in isolation in their own field of expertise. This requires a willingness and ability to learn from and work with people and thus a major reversal in the attitudes of professionals. Starting a two-way communication process with farmers means that field workers integrate information from farmers with the aquaculture production techniques known to them. This requires more knowledge and skills of an extension agent than simply transferring a technical package to farmers; more skills than many extension workers possess at present.
Field workers must also be well acquainted with techniques of 'mobilizing farmers', and how to make best use of farmers' initiatives, how to go about stimulating and organizing farmers' groups, how to communicate effectively with groups.
Section 10.2 has explained that the task of a supervisor should be managerial and executive rather than bureaucratic. Their functions should be open rather than closely defined, responsive as well as directive. This entails more careful training of field supervisors as well, for 'bad bosses create bad workers'. Supervisors will need to learn the methods and philosophy of field control while junior field staff become involved in, and more responsible for the planning of their work, encouraged by closer supervision and in-service technical training to feel that their work is recognized as being of value.
Governments provide support for aquaculture through the educational establishment. However, they focus on teaching (teaching implies the transfer of knowledge from someone who knows to someone who does not know) rather than learning. Participatory learning implies mutual learning - from farmers, from students' own learning and from colleagues (Pretty 1995). To bring about the desired change in attitude and extension methods of field workers requires a change in 'teaching' methods. The field workers should have a chance to experience themselves that a good educator must in the first place be a good learner (Van der Mheen-Sluijer 1995).
The education system thus needs transformation in the style of teaching and learning. Training courses should not be lectures; instead institutions will need to provide creative learning environments, conditions in which learning can take place through experience, and through personal exploration and experimentation. Training and capacity building in the use of community development and participatory methods should occur in the field because field tasks require staff whose experience and competence are practical rather than academic.
Hence, sustainable aquaculture implies collaboration between several disciplines to develop a more systemic and integrated curriculum and training materials.
Finally, it should be noted that the development of participatory extension methods are unlikely to have an effect in the short term. This is because training, capacity-building and institutional support require considerable investments in time. However, in the medium to long term, when results will begin to take effect, it is more likely that such approaches will be sustainable.
11. CONCLUSIONS
The place of small-scale aquaculture in rural development has been discussed in the context of the situation in Sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, central and southern Africa. The region is faced with stagnating agricultural production, a worsening food security situation, increased poverty levels and environmental degradation. In an effort to stimulate economic growth, many countries are following economic restructuring programmes, often on the recommendation of the IMF/World Bank.
Studies indicate that risk avoidance, rather than profit maximization, dominate household decision making for these farmers. Given the uncertainties in the macro-, micro-economic and political climates which farmers have to operate within, this is a rational response. Small-scale aquaculture and agriculture compete with and complement each other for on-farm resources. It is argued that in areas where small-scale aquaculture occurs, it is already integrated into the farming system and furthermore, this is the only feasible way to develop small-scale aquaculture.
The current state of the macro-, micro-economic and political environments in many southern and eastern Africa countries effect the development of integrated small-scale aquaculture, some effects may be negative and some may be positive. Possible negative effects include the reduction in government budgets and the promotion of the private sector in the short term. Positive effects include the contribution of small-scale aquaculture to rural development, more specifically, rural income generation, improvement of food security, food poverty alleviation and environmental degradation.
Integrated small-scale aquaculture might be negatively affected by the reduction in government budgets due to the implementation of SAP. Extension services are being reduced and it is likely that the small-scale fanning sector, which is diverse, geographically scattered, and has a relatively low contribution to export earnings, will be the worst affected. As part of the liberalization process, in some countries the privatization of input supplies may have a negative effect on the development of small-scale aquaculture as farmers cannot access fingerlings. This will occur in countries where there is a need to develop entrepreneurial capacity.
Whilst changes in the macro-economic climate are likely to produce some negative effects in marketing and credit provision, it is concluded that small-scale aquaculture will not be significantly affected. This is because most fish produced from small-scale aquaculture is sold either at the pond or locally and is usually not subject to any marketing restrictions. With regard to credit provision, it is concluded that credit is not required for the development of small-scale aquaculture, and in cases where it has been introduced, has had a negative effect.
Small-scale aquaculture can make a positive contribution to rural income generation. Studies indicate that cash income generation is an important incentive for farmers to take up fish farming and that it can, under some circumstance, generate relatively substantial cash incomes compared to other activities. As fish produced from a pond can be harvested throughout the year, it is an important and easily accessible source of animal protein for the household, especially during times when other household food resources are low. However, it is concluded that small-scale aquaculture is unlikely to have a significant impact in areas of chronic food insecurity as production levels are too low.
In the past, there has been a tendency for aquaculture extension services to target better off farmers. This has led to the belief that it is a technology not suitable for the rural poor. However, studies indicate that small-scale aquaculture can contribute to poverty alleviation provided that extension approaches and methods are appropriate and flexible.
Environmental sustainability is becoming an increasingly important issue in southern and eastern Africa. Research indicates that integrated small-scale aquaculture can have a positive impact on the ecological sustainability of farming systems.
It is concluded that the critical factor which influences the contribution of integrated small-scale aquaculture to rural development is the use of appropriate extension approach. Current extension approaches used in agriculture and aquaculture are considered inappropriate for the majority of small-scale farmers. Existing aquaculture extension services are under-resourced and suffer from many of the problems facing the larger, agricultural extension services concerning staff motivation. Although integrating aquaculture into existing agricultural extension services is considered a good idea, the practical aspects of this integration are more difficult as there may be a problem of system overload, institutional barriers and a requirement to reverse the roles of current extension personnel. Integration is only worthwhile if the existing agricultural extension system has proved effective in reaching small-scale farmers.
In response to the obvious need for a more appropriate extension approach to reach small-scale farmers, and in particular, to develop small-scale aquaculture, a participatory extension approach is proposed. This requires a change in existing attitudes and approaches to extension. Farmers and extension workers have to be equal partners in the development process. The methodological challenge is not necessarily how to produce more or better information but to improve capacities of both farmers and extension agents to analyze situations and learn from each other. This is likely to lead to a reworking of aquaculture technologies to fit the farming production strategies, resource imperatives and social desires of the farm family and not the other way around.
To make more efficient use of the limited resources of extension organizations, it is proposed to utilize social networks in the communities. Extension workers can either build on already existing groups or form new groups to discuss fish farming.
One of the greatest constraints for promoting wider use of participatory extension approaches, lies in the quality of available extension staff. They must be well acquainted with the farmers; they must know about the different systems and practices present in the various communities; they must be able to facilitate discussions; and they must be able to stimulate the discussion while not dominating it.
To bring about this desired change in attitude and use of extension methods, new thinking about teaching and learning is needed. Instead of giving lectures to trainees, which is a one-way communication process, training courses should also be an experience of a two-way communication process.
Most extension organizations are presently not well suited to implement such a participatory approach. Indicators for monitoring and evaluating the performance of field staff, other than the quantitative tasks usually set for them, will have to be developed. Because it is not the number of field visits and kg. of fingerlings distributed that counts but the use of the aquaculture system and its impact on the community. Supervisors need to give a lot more support to field workers and actively follow the developments in the field.
All these changes require much engagement from all parties; extension workers, researchers, government departments and donors. The institutional barriers one may encounter while working towards this change in extension methodology may be substantial.
In areas where small-scale aquaculture is practiced, it is already integrated with agriculture. Where it is not, it has failed. Small-scale aquaculture clearly can make a contribution in rural development, but this contribution should not be overstated. Small-scale aquaculture can be one of the many activities a small-scale farming household can adopt to minimize risks. The challenge is not to ensure that farmers take up aquaculture but to ensure that they are aware of the opportunities and constraints of aquaculture. This is essentially an extension issue, and one which is best resolved through discussion and exchange of information between extensionists and farmers.
REFERENCES *
* Apart from the layout, the references are as presented by the author
Aase, H. and C.A. Mumba 1987. Fish Farming in Zambia: an Overview. FAO Field Document GCP/INT/436/SWE Lusaka, Zambia. 22 pp.
Bagchee, A. 1994. Agricultural Extension in Africa, World Bank Discussion Paper 231.
Binali, W. 1996. Aquaculture Extension in Zimbabwe. In Report of the technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Small-holder Fish Fanning in Southern Africa by H.W. van der Mheen. FAO ALCOM Report 21 Harare, Zimbabwe. 46 pp.
Campbell, D. 1995. The Impact of the Field day Extension Approach on the Development of Fish farming in Selected Areas of Western Kenya. FAO TCP/4551 Field Document no. 1. Kisumu, Kenya. 26 pp.
Cleaver, K.M. 1993. A Strategy to Develop Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa and a Focus for the World Bank. World Bank Technical Paper 203. Africa Technical Department Services.
Cleaver, K.M. and W.G. Donovan, 1995. Agriculture, Poverty and Policy Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank Discussion Paper 280.
Duncan, A. and J. Howell (ed.), 1992. Structural Adjustment and the African Farmer. ODI. London. 214 pp.
Ellis, F. 1992. Agricultural Policies in Developing Countries. Wye Studies in Agriculture and Rural Development, University of Cambridge. 357 pp.
FAO 1989. Farming Systems Development-Concept, Methods, Applications. FAO Rome. 44 pp. FAO, NORAD, UNDP, 1987. Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture. FAO Rome. 85 pp. Fulconis, R. 1988. Le Crédit Piscicole en République Centrafricaine. FAO Rome.
Gaiha, R. 1991, Structural Adjustment and Households Welfare in Rural Areas: a Micro-economic Perspective. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, 100 p.
Galbreath, pp.F. and A.D. Ziehi 1992. Practique de l'elevage de Tilapia nilotica en milieu rural en Côte d'Ivoire. In Aquaculture Systems Research in Africa. Proceedings of a Workshop held in Bouake, Côte d'Ivoire 14-17 November 1988. by G.M. Bernacsek and H. Powles. IDRC p 337-357.
Harrison, E. 1994. Digging Fish Ponds: Perspectives on Motivation. Report to the Overseas Development Administration, School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, U.K., 20p.
Harrison, E. 1993. Fish Farming in the Lake Basin, Kenya. School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, U.K., 33 pp.
Harrison, E., J.A. Steward, R.L. Stirrat, and J. Muir 1994. Fish Farming in Africa. What is the Catch. Summary Report of ODA-supported Research Project Aquaculture Development in Sub-Saharan Africa. School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, U.K., 51p
Institute for African Studies. University of Zambia. 1995. Sector Performance Analysis of the Agricultural Sector. 19 pp.
Janssen, J. and H. Randrainmiarana 1993. Compte-rendu de la Campaigne Rizipiscicole et Piscicole 1991-1992 sur les Hautes-terres de Madagascar. FAO Technical Document FI:DP/MAG/88/005 No 10, Ansirabe, Madagascar. 104 pp.
Jensen, A. 1994. Perspectives sur la privatization de la vulgarisation et l'intensification de la (rizi) pisciculture dans la région de Fianarantsoa, Madagascar. FAO. 22 pp.
Jiggins, J. 1977. Motivation and Performance of Extension Field Staff. In Extension, Planning and the Poor. Agricultural Administration Unit, Occasional Paper 2. (ODI),. pp. 1-19.
Kamp, K., R. Gregory and G. Chowhan 1993. Fish Cutting Pesticide. ILEIA Newsletter 2/93, pp. 22-23.
Kapoor, K. (ed.), 1995. Africa's Experience with Structural Adjustment. Proceedings of the Harare Seminar 23-24 May 1994. World Bank Discussion Paper 288.
Lietar, C. 1985. La Pisciculture Rural en République Centrafricaine. Enquête préliminaire sur la Rentabilité. FAO, Bangui, 42 pp.
Lightfoot, C. and R.S.V. Pullin. 1994. Why an Integrated Resource Management Approach? In Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in Sub Saharan Africa. Extended abstracts from a workshop held in Zomba, Malawi by R.E. can be drawn ICLARM. 45 pp.
Lightfoot, C. and R.S.V. Pullin. 1995. An Integrated Resource Management Approach to the Development of Integrated Aquaculture Farming Systems. In The Management of Integrated Freshwater Agro-Piscicultural Ecosystems in Tropical Areas Brussels, 16-19 May 1994, Proceedings edited by Symoens, J.J. and J.C. Micha. CTA Brussels, pp. 145-167.
Micha J.C. 1995. The Management of Integrated Freshwater Agro-piscicultural Ecosystems in Tropical Areas. In The Management of Integrated Freshwater Agro-Piscicultural Ecosystems in Tropical Areas Brussels, 16-19 May 1994, Proceedings edited by Symoens, J.J. and J.C. Micha. CTA Brussels. pp. 573-581.
Murnyak, D. and G. Mafwenga 1996. Extension Methodology Practiced in Fish Farming projects in Tanzania. In Report of the technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Small-holder Fish Farming in Southern Africa by H.W. van der Mheen. FAO Harare, Zimbabwe. 46 pp.
Nilsson, H. and K. Wetengere. 1994. Adoption and Viability Criteria for Semi Intensive Fish Farming: a report on a socio-economic study in Ruvuma and Mbeya regions, Tanzania. FAO ALCOM Field document 28. Harare, Zimbabwe. 44 pp.
Prein, M. 1995. Farmer Participatory Development of Integrated Agriculture-Aquaculture Systems for Natural resource Management in Ghana. In Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in Sub Saharan Africa. Extended abstracts from a workshop held in Zomba, Malawi by R.E. ICLARM. 45 pp.
Pretty, J.N. 1995. Regenerating Agriculture-Policies and practice for Sustainability and Self-Reliance. London Earthscan Publications Ltd., 320 pp.
Rolings, N. 1982. Alternative Approaches in Extension. In: Progress in Rural Extension and Community Development by G.E. Jones and M.J. Rolls (eds.), Vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 87-115.
Satia, B. 1989. A regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara. FAO Rome. 60 pp.
Scholtz, U. and S. Chimatiro. 1996. The Promotion of Small-Scale Aquaculture in Southern Region of Malawi. In Report of the technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Small-holder Fish Farming in Southern Africa by H.W. van der Mheen. FAO ALCOM Report 21 Harare, Zimbabwe. 46 pp.
Seki, E. And Maly, R. 1994. A Pilot Socio-Economic Survey of Aquaculture in Ruvuma Region, Tanzania. ALCOM Field Document No. 20. FAO, Harare, Zimbabwe. 107 pp.
Spooner, N.J. and L.D. Smith, 1991. Structural Adjustment policy sequencing in sub-Saharan Africa. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper 104
Tembo, S, A. Nkomeshya, H. Ntalasha, and J. Kalumbi. 1995. Pre Asip study of the status of small holder faring and agriculture services in Sinazongwe and Zimba, Southern province of Zambia. Institute for African Studies. University of Zambia. 36 pp.
Thomas, M, N. Hishamunda, D. Brown, C. Engle and C. Jolly. 1995. A Comparative Enterprise Budget Analysis of Small-Scale Fish Culture in Rwanda. 65 pp.
Uphoff, N. 1994. Local Organization for Supporting People-based Agricultural research and Extension: Lessons from Gal Oya, Sri Lanka. In Beyond the Farmer First, by I. Scoones and J. Thompson (eds.). London IT Publications Ltd. pp. 213-220.
Van den Ban, A.W. and H.S. Hawkins 1988. Agricultural Extension. Longman, Essex, England. 328 pp.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. 1995. Aquaculture Extension Guidelines for Small-Scale Farmers. FAO ALCOM Report No. 16, Harare, Zimbabwe. 63 pp.
van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. 1991a. Adoption of Fish Fanning: Promoting and Inhibiting Factors in Eastern Province, Zambia. FAO Harare, Zimbabwe, Field Document GCP/INT/436/SWE.13, 41 pp.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. 1991b. Rapid Rural Appraisal in Luapula Province, Zambia. FAO ALCOM unpublished. 34 pp.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. 1989. The Human Side of Fish Farming. Study Tour to Bangui, Central African Republic. FAO, Chipata, Zambia, unpublished 24 pp.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. and H.W. van der Mheen. 1988. Field Testing of Aquaculture in Eastern Province of Zambia. FAO Field document 6. Chipata, Zambia. 63 pp.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. and S. Sen 1994. Meeting information needs on Gender Issues in Aquaculture. FAO ALCOM Harare, Zimbabwe. 36 pp.
Wijkstrom, U.N. and R. Larsson 1992. Fish Farmers in Rural Communities: Results of a Survey in Northwestern province of Zambia. FAO Field Document ALCOM No. 8, Harare, Zimbabwe. 40 pp.
Wijkstrom, U.N. and H. Aase. 1989. Fish Farmers in Rural Communities. Results of a Socio-Economic Pilot Survey in Northern Province of Zambia. FAO Field Document GCP/INT/436/SWE.5, Lusaka, Zambia. 27 pp.
World Bank, 1989. From Crisis to Sustainable Growth: A Long Term Perspective Study.
World Bank, 1993. Adjustment in Africa: Reform, Results and the Road Ahead. Policy Research Dept.
<section>a</section>
Appendix 4: The Institutional Context
by Arne Andreasson
1. INTRODUCTION
2. RECENT TRENDS
3. GOVERNMENTS AND SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
4. THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
5. DEVELOPMENT AID AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
6. ELEMENTS OF INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE
7. CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES *
1. INTRODUCTION
The aims of the paper are to describe the institutional context of small-scale rural aquaculture and to indicate areas of current institutional change.
Sorensen et. al. (1990) define institutional arrangements as ".. the composite of laws, customs, organizations and management strategies established by society to allocate scarce resources and competing values for a social purpose...". The legal and macro-economic frameworks for aquaculture development, polices and plans etc. are discussed in the paper. However, a rather narrow understanding of the concept of institutions is applied, close to the formal definition of organizations: a structure within which people cooperate according to accepted and recognized roles. No attempt is made to venture into theories of organizational or institutional development. Further, the focus is on governmental institutions and their interaction with the private sector (producers, associations, companies and non-governmental organizations, etc.), international organizations, in this case mainly FAO, and donor agencies.
The paper focuses on sub-Saharan Africa and discusses mainly small-scale aquaculture. A strict definition of small-scale aquaculture is not applied: it is understood to range from the subsistence farmer with a 100 m^2, pond keeping tilapia, to the highly commercialized seaweed fanning on Zanzibar. The main criteria are that the producers belong to the rural or peri-urban populations, with the extensive or semi-intensive aquaculture production as one of two or more household activities to obtain income and/or food.
2. RECENT TRENDS
The role of governmental institutions is changing rapidly. This is partly a result of changes in macro-economic policies. Economies are liberalized with less governmental direct involvement in production and budgets for government authorities are reduced. Consequently, aquaculture development institutions need to find new, more effective, means to reach their objectives and target groups. They also need to sharpen their arguments for funds for aquaculture development.
Institution building, institutional development and strengthening of institutions were important aspects of development work in the 1960's and are again in fashion. There are, however, no quick fixes in development work and institutional weakness is only one of many interrelated reasons and explanations for the slow development of aquaculture.
The mode of operation of development aid projects is also changing. Projects, with expatriate personnel, working closely with counterparts in direct contact with target groups are being replaced by indirect interventions. Projects more frequently support an institutional function which, in turn, is expected to reach the target group with support. The expatriate is being replaced by "institutional twinning" and short term consultants. Governments, international organizations and donors need to modify their work to accommodate these changes.
The focus on institutional development occurs at the same time as aid increasingly is being channelled through NGO's, which often are believed to be in a better position to support grass-root development than governmental institutions. However, more funds at the disposal of NGO's reveal their weaknesses and aid funds are also allocated to the strengthening of such organizations.
A fundamental question is: How should governments adjust their institutions to new situations and reach their objectives and targets with limited resources?
3. GOVERNMENTS AND SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
3.1 Macro-Economic Framework
3.2 Legislation
3.3 Policies and Plans for Aquaculture Development
3.4 Credit
3.5 Management and Administration
3.6 Research and Development
3.7 Extension
3.8 Supply of Inputs
Governments in sub-Saharan Africa have traditionally assumed an important and wide role for aquaculture development, ranging from legislation to production and distribution of seed and other inputs (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987). The engagement in the productive end of the chain has also often involved production and sale of table fish.
3.1 Macro-Economic Framework
Macro-economic conditions to a large extent determine aquaculture development. They provide the framework within which the sector operates and create the "business climate". This can either promote or restrict development. The rapid development of seaweed culture on Zanzibar and the expansion of rural small-scale fish ponds in Eastern Province of Zambia occurred when the economies were liberalized. There are other examples which seem to indicate a correlation between liberal macro-economic policies and development of small-scale aquaculture (Andreasson, 1992).
It is evident that government, though not aquaculture development institutions, has the ultimate responsibility for macro-economic policies. There are a wide variety of instruments for governments related to the fiscal and monetary policies for support to the sector (Kouka, in print). Planning for aquaculture development, as well as development interventions, governmental or private, need to consider the macro-economic conditions in more detail than previously has been done (ALCOM, 1994).
3.2 Legislation
Coche et. al. (1994) found, in a review of 12 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, that six countries (Côte d'Ivoire, Cameron, Congo, Central African Republic, and Zambia) had no specific aquaculture legislation, three (Zimbabwe, Malawi, Tanzania) had limited legislation for the introduction of exotic species, and three countries (Madagascar, Kenya and Nigeria) had specific aquaculture legislation. An ICLARM study of aquaculture in Malawi (ICLARM and GTZ, 1991) states that the sector is unprotected by formal legislation and that customary law applies to aquaculture with few exceptions.
Houtte, et. al (1989) list a number of laws which affect aquaculture, such as tax and duty laws and regulations, land laws and regulations, water codes, environment protection, conservation of natural resources, control of pollution, animal health and animal disease laws, import and export laws and regulations, public health and sanitary laws and regulations, fish and game laws and regulations etc. Many laws, acts and ordinances which affect aquaculture were instituted long before aquaculture became an established industry (Ackefors, et. al. 1994). Existing legislation, often more concerned with conservation than production, related to water abstraction, pollution, water or coastal and lakeshore rights, hinder the development of small-scale fish fanning (ICLARM and GTZ, 1991).
There are according to Houtte et. al. (1989) a few key legal issues:
- the general place of aquaculture in the legal system
- access to the use of water and land
- environmental impact (including diseases)
- import of live fish
- the introduction of non-indigenous species.
In an article in 1994, Houtte raises questions regarding the definition of aquaculture. The current FAO definition, largely for statistical purposes, gives importance to ownership to determine the borderline between capture fisheries and aquaculture. Houtte argues that for legal purposes the definition should be related more to the activity than to ownership.
An important issue for small-scale aquaculture development in southern Africa is access and rights to land and water. Traditional customs often conflict with modem law. Aquaculture development institutions need to acquire a thorough knowledge of and adjust their operations to such conditions. Hereditary customs and differences between these in patri-and matrilineal societies influence the adoption of aquaculture (van der Mheen-Sluijer et. al. 1988, ICLARM and GTZ, 1991, and van der Mheen-Sluijer, 1991).
A specific issue for legislation is manmade reservoirs built for irrigation, domestic water or watering of livestock. There is often a lack of rules and regulations for access to fishing, management of the fisheries and the establishment of aquaculture facilities (enclosures or cages). While such laws and regulations have been enacted for large reservoirs, for example Lake Kariba, which is shared between Zambia and Zimbabwe, many smaller reservoirs are unregulated. One element is whether the reservoir is on private or communal land. Botswana and Lesotho, for example, have experienced such problems (Nermark et al 1994, David e Silva, 1993, Haight. et. al. 1994). These countries are amending or have recently amended their laws. Uncertainties about delegation of resource utilization rights to dam committees in Zimbabwe have been reported as one reason for unsuccessful community management of the resources (Sayagues, 1995).
Most countries have introduced procedures to obtain a license or permit for the establishment and operation of an aquaculture facility. The permit is usually related to the right to land and water and environmental factors. There are at present no requirements for licenses and permits for the establishment of small-scale rural fish ponds in the countries of sub-Saharan Africa. The ponds are small and located within an existing farm and the access rights (customary or modem law) also cover fish ponds.
3.3 Policies and Plans for Aquaculture Development
ALCOM reviewed policies and plans for aquaculture development in the, then ten, SADC-countries in southern Africa (before the Republic of South Africa became a member). The reviews (ALCOM 1988a and b, ALCOM, 1994) showed that most governments in the SADC region did not have an explicit development policy or plans for aquaculture. Existing policy statements were linked to agriculture and fisheries and focused on the importance offish as food and the contribution offish to food security. Fish was often regarded as a source of cheap protein. The review concluded that more consistent policies, strategies, plans and programmes needed to be elaborated and that the close links between aquaculture and agriculture should be reflected to ensure sustainability.
Coche et. al. (1994) concluded from a review of twelve countries in sub-Saharan Africa that few countries had a quantified long-term plan for aquaculture development. Further, they state that the midterm sectoral plans usually include brief statements about targets for aquaculture. However, the plans and programmes often basically are lists of projects without clear links to policies and strategies.
The governments of sub-Saharan Africa have recognized the need for policies and plans for the aquaculture sector. It is important in the process of plan preparation to establish mechanisms for consultations with the target groups and other agents, which are often lacking (ALCOM, 1994).
3.4 Credit
Credit is an issue mainly for large-scale, capital intensive, aquaculture. In many countries, including in developed countries, banks have been reluctant to extend credit to aquaculture which is perceived as a high risk enterprise.
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987) states that credit does not seem to be a problem in areas where aquaculture is well established. Neither did it find that the expansion of small-scale rural fish farming in sub-Saharan Africa was restrained by credit. Formal credit is usually not extended to small-scale rural aquaculture but has been given on pilot scale under projects. The results have been negative: low repayment rates and no sustainability (Coche. et. al. 1994). Such schemes have often mainly benefited commercial farmers. Small farmers can usually not produce the required collateral. They also often lack knowledge to handle the paper work involved (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987).
Credit is normally not justified for small-scale rural fish fanning; the cost for pond construction is small. Governments have, in most of the sub-Saharan countries, supplied seed at highly subsidized prices. Further, the production is low and to a large extent consumed in the household, which is detrimental to cash outlays.
Informal sources of credit exist for pond construction and to obtain fingerlings. In some cases "working parties", for which there may be reciprocal obligations, are organized to help with pond construction.
Although credit at present is not regarded as an issue for small-scale aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa, the situation may change. Demands for and interest in increased productivity will increase costs for pond construction. Costs may also be incurred for ex-farm feed ingredients. Finally, privatized seed production will increase the operating costs for farmers. The farmer may, when adopting technologies for commercial small-scale fish farming, need cash. There are no institutional mechanisms at present for such credit.
Tietze (1994) reports on changes in the international political and economic climate under which rural credit programmes operate. The economic deregulation and liberalization promoted by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have direct impacts on formal rural credit for fish farming. In this connection, credit programmes specifically targeted at the disadvantaged are discouraged in favour of free competition for the highest rates of financial return to capital.
3.5 Management and Administration
Most countries organize their management and administration of the aquaculture sector within the ministry of agriculture or ministry of fisheries, in some cases in the ministry responsible for natural resources. Within the ministry there is usually a department of fisheries, which also handles aquaculture. There are few cases when small-scale pond fish farming, although conceptually closer to animal husbandry than fisheries, are managed within the department of agriculture. There are historical reasons for this.
The picture of aquaculture management and administration is somewhat diverse in the SADC-countries in Africa. In Zambia, Botswana, Lesotho, and Swaziland (all landlocked) aquaculture is handled by the ministry responsible for agriculture. In Malawi (landlocked) it falls under the ministry responsible for natural resources. Zimbabwe (landlocked) has divided the responsibility with aquaculture extension under the agriculture ministry and research and development under the ministry responsible for environment and tourism (within the wildlife management department). In Namibia aquaculture falls under the ministry of fisheries, as does mariculture in Angola and Mozambique. Inland aquaculture in the latter countries is handled by the ministry of agriculture (ALCOM 1988 and 1994). A similar arrangement has been established in South Africa with the department of agriculture handling inland aquaculture and the Sea Fisheries Directorate under the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism being responsible for mariculture (Hecht, 1994)
Coche et. al. (1994) found that in sub-Saharan Africa often more than one governmental department was responsible for aquaculture development, leading to overlapping, confusion and competition. They stress the importance of one single authority responsible for the sector and note that administrative changes recently have tended to achieve this.
The services provided by the departments responsible for aquaculture include in varying degree policy formulations, planning, legislation, research and development, training and extension, credit, and production inputs such as seed (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987). Additional services may include loans of construction equipment, supplementary feed, sale or provision of harvesting gear, grants for construction, sale of fish from government fish farms, and farmers training (Coche et. al. 1994).
The department responsible for aquaculture usually has a central administration and local representations linked to local government on provincial and district levels. For example Zambia has Provincial Fisheries Aquaculturists with Fisheries Officers and Fisheries Assistants at Provincial level and Fisheries Officers at District level. The functions of the decentralized staff are often linked to the operation of government fish farms and extension. Coche et. al. (1994) in their review of 12 countries found that they had more than 200 state fish farms. The majority of these farms were built in 1950 - 60s. Although many have been rehabilitated during the 70s and 80s through technical assistance programmes, most are in varying stages of disrepair and functioning far below capacity. The state of government fish farms is the same in the whole of the SADC region, with the exception of Namibia and South Africa, and to some extent Malawi. There are many reasons for this:
- state fish farms may in some cases have outlived their usefulness for development in light of new policies stressing the role of the private sector
- governments are not able to allocate sufficient funds for their operation
- state fish farms are used for purposes they were not designed for (for example production of table size fish for sale instead of research and production of fingerlings)
- bad management partly because of lack of incentives for the staff
- inappropriate site selection, which in some cases seem to have been based more on political concerns than physical criteria
The farms have in some cases been obliged to produce fish for sale to improve finances. This has been detrimental to the original purposes of the farms. Management and decentralized staff have tended to give priority to the operation of the fish farm over other duties such as extension. Some countries are at present divesting their interests in government fish farms. A few, for example Congo and Rwanda, are planning privatization of the state infrastructure (Coche et. al. 1994).
One symptom of institutional weaknesses is the lack, in most sub-Saharan countries, of data and information which are systematized and easily accessible to the private sector, scientists, extension workers and administrators and policy makers. This lack of compiled information is detrimental also to project formulation. Both governments' and donor's decisions regarding support to projects are affected by this. Andersson (1989) found some 450 references for fisheries and aquaculture in Zambia. The documents were scattered in different document holdings or resting with individuals; some not even available in the country. Most fisheries and aquaculture departments in sub-Saharan Africa have a documentation center or library. Because of lack of funds for renewals of subscriptions on scientific journals, magazines and handbooks, the holdings are usually outdated. Reports from research, missions etc. are often not submitted to the documentation center and the usefulness of the
library is reduced.
Good progress has been made in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa with regard to education. The level of education is today, at least in the central administrations, usually relevant and adequate. This has been achieved through emphasis on the national education system and on higher level training often through fellowships abroad. However, the existing staff of the departments usually have an educational background in biology or technology. Few of the staff have the necessary background for policy and strategy formulation, planning, economics, socio-economics, and information technology which are essential for modem fisheries and aquaculture administrations.
Institutional constraints have in the past been attributed to lack of or limited "resources" such as trained staff, infrastructure and operational funds. Recent work on organizational and institutional development pays more attention to issues of motivation, incentive, reward and sanction (Moore, 1995). Experiences from ALCOM's work with extension projects in Zambia, Mozambique and Tanzania support this new emphasis. Good results were achieved thanks to what has been labelled as "dedicated department of fisheries staff". No additional formal training was provided for the staff through the projects. However, "enabling" conditions were created. They included fora for discussion of findings, exchange of information and exposure to new approaches from outside the department. Leth-Nissen (1995) argues that by removing obstacles with regard to communications, internal reporting and follow-up, access to up-to-date information and the creation of fora for discussion of new ideas and
visions in which junior staff actively could participate, considerably improved their performance and the efficiency of the department's extension work.
3.6 Research and Development
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO, 1987) stated that aquaculture research is mainly carried out by government departments, the same which have the responsibility for management and administration of the sector. In some countries universities also have important research programs for aquaculture. The evaluation further concludes that the ongoing research is mainly oriented towards biological and technical disciplines and that research faces severe institutional constraints; weak management and coordination, inexperienced scientists and insufficient funding. Little research was carried out on the economics and socio-economics of aquaculture.
Coche et. al. (1994) made a thorough review of aquaculture research in 12 countries. They found that these countries had at least 21 major research stations. The government is dominant in research. However, also the private sector carries out research in Kenya, Zambia and Zimbabwe. They ranked the research facilities and categorized only two as "very good" (in Côte d'Ivoire and Rwanda) and three as "good" (Malawi, Madagascar and Cameroon). They also found, similar to the findings of the Thematic Evaluation, that bio-technological research dominates and is given top priority in all countries. However, economic aspects (mainly marketing) had been studied in half of the countries, while social aspects and especially environmental research had been given low priority. They found that the researchers themselves to a large extent decide on and define the research topic. The objectives are mainly related to institutional objectives or those of the international programmes. In the
identification of research projects there is in some cases a dialogue between producers and scientists. However there are only a few cases when the research objectives are defined in a national plan.
Additional institutional constraints are lack of data bases and flows of information within and between research institutions in the region and between researchers and users of the results (extension systems, producers).
The research priorities, identified by the SIFR (Study on International Fisheries Research) as reported in Coche et. al. (1994) and by Pedini (1994), are bio-technical (species, feed, fertilizers, brood stock, culture systems, small water-body fisheries, and marine aquaculture), economic (mainly market research) and socio-economic. Thus, the highest priority is still given the bio-technical aspects offish farming. There are several reasons to the low priority of other disciplines. Administrators and policy makers need economic, social and environmental data for policies, strategies and planning. These needs have not yet been channelled to and been felt by researchers. Further, there is a lack of researchers representing these disciplines in administrations.
A round-table meeting in Zimbabwe defined institutional constraints to aquaculture research in terms of ill-defined research goals, lack of coordination between government institutions and research institutes, and lack of access to systematized information on past and ongoing research in the country (ALCOM, 1991 and Madhu, 1991).
The meeting also reviewed the private sector research on trout, which has been organized by the Trout Producers Association. The trout farmers felt the need for additional research, were financially sufficiently strong and had the organizational capacity to establish a small research facility. Staff of the governmental Nyanga Trout Research Center can conduct experiments of interest for the commercial farmers at that facility. Private sector research or, more likely, experimental work is also carried out on most commercial fish farms in the region. The editorial of the Newsletter of the Aquaculture Association of Southern Africa (no. 32, September 1995), discusses open as opposed to confidential aquaculture research. The article discusses "assignments" to scientists and research institutions from the private sector, in which the contracts can have a clause on confidentiality. It argues that this way of organizing research and development leads to duplications and late
introduction of innovations in the commercial sector in southern Africa.
Organized private sector research relies on strong common interests in a restricted group, which is well organized and has sufficient economic strength, assignments to scientists or research institutions by individual companies or on-farm experiments. For small-scale aquaculture, research funds have to come from outside the producers. Institutional arrangements promoting a close dialogue and collaboration on more equal terms between scientists and farmers would be an appropriate approach. Brummett and Haight (this volume) discuss participatory research in detail. To be effective and to have a wide impact different forms of rural organizations should preferably be involved in farmer-participatory research. Bebbington et. al. (1996) conclude that there is a considerable potential for the participation of rural organizations in both research and extension. However, there are limitations. There are only a few rural organizations or producers associations active in fish farming.
Experience has shown that it is difficult to establish new sustainable organizations. If organizations exist, they are often institutionally weak for the purpose of aquaculture development because of lack of funds, skills, and limited information channels. Further, if they exist, they were often created for other purposes than fish farming and may not give priority to research and extension. When venturing into farmer-participatory research (and/or extension) such weaknesses should be considered and institutional support should be included when required.
3.7 Extension
A thorough review of extension for rural aquaculture is made in Sen. et al. (this volume) and no details are discussed here. It may suffice to state that extension services, in spite of approach, structure or institutional arrangements, are costly and that their effectiveness and efficiency have often been questioned. Extension methods have tended over the last years to become more participatory in approach, involving the target group in a dialogue.
In most countries in sub-Saharan Africa a separate fisheries and aquaculture extension service has been created. One exception is Zimbabwe. Arguments have for many years been brought forward giving the rationale for the integration of aquaculture into agricultural extension systems (Harrison, 1994, Sen et. al. 1996). This is being done for example in Zambia, which at present is reported to be reorganizing its fisheries department to allow a formal integration of the extension services. Mozambique and Tanzania have also attempted such integration. While integration is conceptually convincing, its practicalities still need to be demonstrated. The work of the Department of Fisheries in Eastern Province of Zambia was enhanced by close, although informal, collaboration with the agriculture extension service initiated in 1992 (ALCOM, 1995). The early hesitance about collaboration was changed. It can be argued that a positive attitude was created simultaneously with the staff of
the provincial Department of Fisheries becoming more confident in their roles as aquaculture subject matter specialists. The integration of the extension services was facilitated because both departments belonged to the same ministry. Van der Mheen (1996), reporting from a sub-regional consultation on extension for small-scale fish farming in southern Africa, identified administrative routines of ministries and departments as the main obstacle for integration of extension systems.
3.8 Supply of Inputs
Seed has been the main input supplied by governments in Latin America and Africa, where aquaculture is a young sector. Where aquaculture is more established, the private sector is itself organizing the supply (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987). Besides seed, materials for pond construction, tools, feed, and harvesting equipment have also at times been provided by governments at a subsidized price, as gifts or as loans (often as components of aquaculture development projects).
The supply of inputs can be regarded as a subsidy to create interest in and an understanding of aquaculture practices and to stimulate initial developments. The sustainability of such government services are, however, uncertain. The prices for the inputs do not reflect real costs, the government facilities (fish culture stations) are inefficient and often not able to provide seed on a regular basis. Harrison (1994) questions the supply of inputs with regard to costs for government facilities (hatcheries, transport), the creation of dependence and inhibition of private initiatives, production and distribution of the inputs on commercial conditions organized by farmers, and the implications for the long term viability. The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO, UNDP and Norway, 1987) discusses the supply of inputs, mainly fingerlings, and states that governments are not organized to provide fingerlings efficiently. It also argues that the decline of fish farming in the 60's
in sub-Saharan Africa was related to the decline in operations of government fish farms and subsequent lack of fingerlings for farmers at the expected low, subsided, prices.
At the time of the Thematic Evaluation, 1985-1987, there were few signs that governments were changing their attitudes to the supply of inputs. Attitudes are, however, changing now. Harrison (1994) reports on attempts in Kenya to give up government supply of fingerlings, Coche et. al. (1994) mention plans to privatize government fish farms in a few countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Jensen et. al. (1994) and van der Berg (1996) discuss successful privatization of fingerling production and sale in Madagascar. Farmer-to-farmer supply of fingerlings is becoming more and more important in Zambia, Tanzania and Mozambique, actively supported by projects. It is safe to conclude that governments in general in sub-Saharan Africa have recognized the limitations of government supplies of inputs to small-scale aquaculture development.
4. THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Producers and Producers' Organizations
4.2 Production of Inputs
4.3 Marketing Systems
4.4 Private Sector Extension
4.5 Non-Governmental Organizations
The private sector is a wide concept which encompasses the small-scale producers, farmers' associations, fish farming companies, and companies producing seed, feed, tools and materials, and traders, as well as non-governmental organizations.
4.1 Producers and Producers' Organizations
The small-scale aquaculture production in sub-Saharan Africa is mainly organized by the household within the frame of the farming system. The household usually generates income and food from a relatively wide range of sources: on-farm activities with crops as maize, cassava and vegetables, chicken and livestock, and in some cases fish, and off-farm income or food generating activities. Typically, fish is a secondary source of income and food and accorded priority in relation to this. There are numerous reports and research papers on the household organization and small-scale fish fanning (see for example ALCOM 1987, van der Mheen-Sluijer et. al. 1988, Wijkstrom et. al. 1989, ICLARM and GTZ 1991, Goevereh et. al. undated, Harrison 1994, and Nilsson et. al. 1994) and the organization of fish production in the farming system (for example ICLARM and GTZ 1991, Kartzow et. al. 1992, Brummett and Haight, in print). Questions of risk and diversification of production are important
for the household's decisions on fish farming. Its decisions are also influenced by access to inputs, markets, extension services, information, the legal framework and the general economic conditions.
Fish farmers' associations are not prominent in southern Africa for rural small-scale fish farming. A few active associations are reported from Tanzania and Zambia, functioning as discussion clubs and (in Tanzania) to set the prices for the sale of fingerlings (van der Mheen, personal communication). There are also a few examples of women's clubs and one football club in Zambia, which are engaged in fish fanning. The situation is different for commercial aquaculture, where for example the trout farmers' association in Zimbabwe is strong, as well as farmers' associations in South Africa (Hecht 1992).
There are a few examples on cooperative small-scale fish farming, mainly from the so called "green belts" around Maputo in Mozambique. However, cooperatives have not had any significant influence on small-scale aquaculture development in southern Africa.
4.2 Production of Inputs
The organization of fish seed supply is becoming an important aspect of rural aquaculture development in southern Africa. The documented examples of private seed production and distribution are still few. However, these activities are becoming important in parts of Zambia, Tanzania and Mozambique, van der Berg (1996) describes the best documented example, in Madagascar. The development, which was initiated by a project, had good results. Already in 1992, 75% of the market was served by 72 private fingerling producers.
There is no production of prefabricated feed in the rural-small scale fish farming in southern Africa and thus no producers of specific fish feed. The same is valid for manufacturers of tools and equipment. There are net manufacturers in Zimbabwe, Zambia, Mozambique, Malawi, Tanzania and Angola, all operating far below capacity. There is an unmet demand for fishing nets in all countries, possibly with the exception of Malawi (Melander and Nilsson, 1991) also for the fish farming sub-sector. However, the development of this industry is likely to focus on the needs of capture fisheries. Harvesting gear for small-scale aquaculture will be a low priority because of their scattered nature and low purchasing power at the present level of productivity.
4.3 Marketing Systems
Marketing of fish has not been controlled in the same way as marketing of agriculture products. However, most fish from rural small-scale fish farming have been, and is, either consumed in the producing or nearby households. The portion of the harvest which is sold is done so at the pond site. Thus, there are no developed marketing systems.
Improved marketing opportunities, possibly linked to market systems for agriculture products, as vegetables, could provide incentives for intensification of fish farming. It could, however, possibly have a negative effect on fish fanning by increasing opportunity costs for land and labour suitable for ponds and vegetable gardens (Sen et. al. 1996).
4.4 Private Sector Extension
Farmer-to-farmer transfer of technology is important in rural areas of sub-Saharan Africa. Van der Mheen-Sluijer (1991 and 1995) and Sen et. al. (1996) discuss the importance of farmer-to-farmer exchange of information for example for the adoption of small-scale fish farming. The earlier negative attitude among government authorities and externally funded projects towards farmer-to-farmer exchange of information has changed and also projects have encouraged this form to expand the coverage. In Eastern Province of Zambia 93% of fish farmers had received information from other farmers. The majority of farmers had got the information this way in Tanzania (Nilsson and Wetengere 1994). Farmer-to-farmer exchange of information can be strengthened by the utilization of contact farmers or motivators as intermediaries between the formal extension system, groups of farmers and between farmers, especially late adopters (van der Mheen-Sluijer, 1995).
In Madagascar fingerling producers assumed certain extension functions, assisted by a project. This is one indication on increasing importance of the private sector involvement in extension in the region (van den Berg 1996).
Feed suppliers could be another resource for private sector extension. Both feed and seed suppliers have an interest in the spread of fish farming to increase their market. However, at the present stage of rural fish farming in southern Africa, pelleted feed or ex-farm feed ingredients are seldom used, and this extension resource can be realized only if more intensive fish fanning practices are adopted.
The remarkable development of seaweed fanning in Zanzibar was led by a private sector initiative. Companies wishing to purchase dried seaweed gave extension advice and organized inputs for small-scale seaweed farming. The seaweed industry recently encompassed 15000 self-employed culturists, mainly women (Sen, 1991, Msuya 1993 and 1995). The seaweed culture development is an example of a highly effective private sector extension without any links to a formal extension system. The motive for the private sector initiative was pure profit. The impact, however, was important for rural development and improved standard of living in a rural area.
4.5 Non-Governmental Organizations
Non-governmental organizations are understood (Holmén and Jirstrom 1996) to include "... small-scale local (development) organizations in the Third World, indigenous or international service organizations giving support to local development organizations, as well as private aid-organizations of varying sizes and purpose in the rich countries".
The trend towards NGOs as channels for development assistance was mentioned in Section 2. International funding through NGO's doubled (from US$ 3,6 to 7 billion) from 1983 to 1990. The assistance through NGOs increased five times more than the total overseas development assistance during the same period. This means that a substantial reallocation of funds between channels has occurred. The number of NGOs has mushroomed, specially in developing countries. Only 50% of NGOs in developing countries are more than 10 years old. This indicates that niches for access to funds have been created and are being filled with NGOs. Holmén and Jirstrom (1996) relate the "donor scramble for NGOs" more to political and social developments in the north than conditions in the south. These developments are related to the World Bank structural adjustment policies and aid fatigue in developed countries, the latter more concerned with perceived inefficient channels than aid in itself.
The Working Group on the Future of ALCOM found (ALCOM 1994) that eleven NGOs had been involved in aquaculture projects in six SADC-countries (South Africa was not a member at that time); Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Zambia. Two NGOs assisted more than one country. These were OXFAM and CUSO. Besides these US Peace Corps and the Catholic Church (Zambia) were the main organizations. It is evident that NGO's have had only a limited and local impact on aquaculture development in the region.
The activities of the Catholic Church in Luapula Province of Zambia in the development of fish fanning have been documented. However, there is scanty information on NGOs and rural fish farming development. Generally it may be stated that in spite of the donor interest in and emphasis on support to and though NGOs, the effectiveness and efficiency also of NGO interventions are questioned. Their weaknesses would seem to be similar to those of governmental or official channels for assistance; problems of reaching the grassroots levels and weak performance in relation to gender.
5. DEVELOPMENT AID AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
5.1 Trends in Development Aid to Aquaculture
5.2 Donor Agencies and Institutional Support
5.3 FAO and the Development of Aquaculture Institutions
5.1 Trends in Development Aid to Aquaculture
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (FAO, UNDP and Norway 1987) reported that US$ 368 million had been allocated worldwide for aquaculture development between 1978 and 1984. This was 14% of the total assistance to the fisheries sector. US$ 38 million had been channelled through FAO, which got 90% of its funding for aquaculture projects from UNDP. Harrison (this volume) reports that US$ 910 million had been committed to 440 aquaculture projects worldwide. Fifteen percent of the number of projects were implemented in Africa. FAO was the executing agency for 18% of the projects. In ALCOM (1994) it is reported that 59 aquaculture projects had been implemented in the SADC-region during the period 1973 - 1993. In addition the region had participated in nine regional or interregional projects. ALCOM drew the conclusion that the development support to aquaculture projects had decreased since the 1980s.
The general trends for development aid indicated in Section 2 are valid also for support to aquaculture development; institutional development and assistance through NGOs.
5.2 Donor Agencies and Institutional Support
Institution building or institutional development is receiving increasing attention from donors. Support to institution building or development is nothing new. Substantial effort went into the creation and strengthening of institutions in the 1950s and 60s. In the case of aquaculture this was reflected for example in support to fisheries departments through training programmes and the creation of government fish farms for research and demonstration purposes. Also, the emphasis on "absorption capacity" in the institutions in recipient countries was a reflection of the concern for institutional weaknesses. During the last few years institutional weaknesses have again been in the focus for explanations of "development failures" and support to institutions have again become an important feature of aid programmes.
From the literature about institutional development (reviewed by Moore 1995) it is evident that there are uncertainties about definitions of the concept "institutions". The range in definitions is wide as stated in the introduction to this paper. Consequently, also the definitions of institution building, strengthening of institutions and institutional development are vague and no borders between the different concepts are maintained. Moore concludes that it is hardly meaningful to dwell on subtle differences in the definitions. Also the concept "capacity building", which has been given prominence in sub-Saharan Africa is similar and for the purpose of the analysis equivalent to institutional development.
There are considerable methodological difficulties in the evaluation of institutions. Most methods discussed in the literature seem more to be checklists than proper evaluation methods. The donors also seem to give considerable freedom to their consultants in choosing their method for the evaluation or appraisal of institutions.
In spite of the difficulties with evaluations there seems to be a consensus that institution building projects are less successful than other projects. Among the reasons cited are that donors have difficulties in showing the required flexibility (an institutional weakness among donors) in approach and inability to give long-term commitments to the process for improved efficiency and effectiveness.
A few donors' approaches to the appraisal of institutions were reviewed in the preparation of this paper. In SIDA (the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency) the importance of an assessment of the administrative capacity is stressed (SIDA, 1990). The criteria to be assessed are:
- the experience and competence of the staff with regard to project management
- routines for the transfer of knowledge (the interactions between the project, the line ministry, the ministry of finance or corresponding, and the donor)
- competence and routine for procurement of goods and services
- internal managerial and administrative systems and procedures, including decision making, salary structure, and other rules and conditions which determine performance incentives
- the relations between the proposed project and the ministry
- the need to support the project management with donor resources.
SIDA has also used a relatively simple model to categorize institutions as to their performance (Andersson, 1991):
Stage 1. The organization exists but does not have the capacity and capability to perform the expected tasks
Stage 2. The organization produces the expected work (achieving objectives and targets with acceptable standard)
Stage 3. The institution/organization has the capability to initiate, plan and implement changes for improved performance.
In NORAD's Manual for programme and project cycle management (NORAD, 1994) it is stated that the main emphasis in the appraisal of projects should be design elements and sustainability factors. The institutional setting is regarded as one sustainability factor. The document however does not give any details about methods for the appraisal or detailed criteria for appraisals. The Norwegian aid programme emphasizes the responsibility of the recipient country for planning, implementation and evaluation. Institutional development is a priority area for Norwegian assistance. NORAD is at present elaborating strategies for support to institutional development.
The Directorate-General for International Cooperation of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs states in its Policy Plan for 1992 - 1995 that limited capacities of both governments and nongovernmental organizations are among the greatest problems affecting the countries of southern Africa. The weaknesses are attributed the lack of trained personnel (general lack and the inability of governments to retain competent staff in competition with the private sector), budget deficits, outdated structures of institutions and inadequate separation between politics and administration. Lack of resources and trained staff are factors hampering NGOs. The Netherlands therefore supports institution-building in the region and the document states that institutional feasibility is one of the considerations in project appraisals. The factors which are examined are efficiency, effectiveness, and the extent to which the proposed structure fits into the project's social context. When there
is a need, the Netherlands will also support exclusive institution building projects.
5.3 FAO and the Development of Aquaculture Institutions
FAO supports member nations with activities on three levels (Pedini, 1992 and 1993); the regular programme, the field programme and through the Investment Center.
The Regular Programme has key roles to be normative, advisory and a clearing house for information and data. A number of regional advisory bodies are serviced by the Regular Programme (the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM), the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission (IPFC), the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC), the Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (CIFA), and the Commission for Inland Fisheries for Latin America (COPESCAL)). Examples of normative functions have been the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (1995) which is guiding future fisheries and aquaculture developments with regard to resources and environment. The Codes contain a commitment to support for developing countries to realize their aquaculture potential. Other such initiatives have been the, then important, Kyoto Strategy from 1976 and the Thematic Evaluation of 1987. Both represent the understanding of the issues facing aquaculture development at that time
and provide advice and guidance based on the experiences which had been gained. A number of regional projects were initiated under the Field Programme to further test and develop development issues after the Kyoto meeting; NACA in Asia, ARAC in Africa, AQUILA in Latin America, and MEDRAP in the Mediterranean. These projects lasted more than 10 years each. Besides working on specific issues for aquaculture development they acted as institutional arrangements for regional exchange of data and information.
Later, sub-regional programmes as the BOBP (the Bay of Bengal Programme) in South Asia and ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme) in the SADC-region of southern Africa have furthered sub-regional collaboration and worked on test and demonstration of methods and techniques for coastal small-scale aquaculture (BOBP) and small-scale inland aquaculture (ALCOM).
Both the regional and sub-regional initiatives have had an impact on institutional development. In the case of the BOBP this impact was incidental (institutional development was not mentioned as an objective or aim of the programme). In a forthcoming report, Andreasson states that institutional development, however, was the impact mentioned most frequently by respondents in interviews.
FAO is also the executing agency for national aquaculture development projects. In 1993 FAO operated 33 national projects; 14 in Asia, 8 in Africa, 7 in Latin America and 4 in the Mediterranean (Pedini, 1993).
Recent developments have and are changing the traditional mode of operation of FAO. Budgets have been cut which have resulted in reduction of FAO headquarters staff. UNDP has decided on national execution of its projects. In 1984 UNDP contributed 90% of FAOs aquaculture field projects. The Field Programme has been drastically reduced. It is unlikely that this reduction will be compensated by increases in bilaterally funded and executed projects. FAO has also initiated a decentralization of its organization with both professional and operational capacity being outstationed to regional and sub-regional offices.
The effects of the changes have not yet been fully reviewed. However, there is an understanding that FAOs normative role will be given more prominence. Concern is, however, expressed that to fulfill the normative role the organization and its staff need close links to and hands-on contacts with field developments.
6. ELEMENTS OF INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE
6.1 Summary of Changes with Effect on Aquaculture Institutions
6.2 Key Central Government Activities for Small-Scale Aquaculture
6.3 International Organizations
6.4 Donor Agencies
6.1 Summary of Changes with Effect on Aquaculture Institutions
Governments are rethinking their role, public spending has been cut, subsidies have been reduced, civil servants have been retrenched, trade have been liberalized and free markets have been introduced - all these are changes affect aquaculture and aquaculture institutions. Governments will rely on more indirect measures to reach their objectives, they will provide less direct support to the sector and the sector has to argue for its share of government budgets. FAO, as the lead organization in aquaculture, is subject to change; its normative role is emphasized and the direct involvement on field level is reduced, its budgets are cut and the organization is being decentralized. The funding to its field programme is gradually decreasing.
Donor agencies are changing their mode of work; several countries have announced heavy cuts in aid budgets, there are demands that aid funds should be used more effectively and efficiently, and more funds are channeled through non-governmental organizations. The design of projects goes towards "institutional twinning" and short term consultancies instead of the long term expatriate working with counterparts.
Arguments for small-scale aquaculture have tended to be weak - it has had a slow start in sub-Saharan Africa. There is however, a considerable physical potential (Kapetsky, 1994). There are also numerous reports on increasing numbers of farming households who take up fish farming. The data on the viability and profitability of individual farms or ponds are, however, at best scanty. There are inherent methodological problems in determining production and productivity in relation to inputs. However, as reported by Harrison (1994) and Sen et. al. (this volume) the scattered information indicates that small-scale rural aquaculture is beneficial for farming households (income, food, risk minimization) and in many cases the best known alternative use of resources. There is also an argument that through a close integration of fish ponds with the farming systems the increase in the total output from the farm is higher than just the additional fish (Brummett and Haight, this volume).
Wijkstrom (1991) discussed the contribution of small-scale, rural, aquaculture to economic growth. He argued that the contribution is highest in stagnant economies with idle resources. He also argued that the farmer (individual or household) derives an income in three ways from fish farming; direct net income, income in kind (through improving the household's cash balance) and through the "consumption effect". More and systematized quantitative data is required by governments to justify budget allocations to the sector.
6.2 Key Central Government Activities for Small-Scale Aquaculture
Governments will increasingly rely on indirect measures to promote different economic sectors, including small-scale aquaculture. The instruments are macro-economic policies, legislation and sectoral policies and plans. Governments can adopt two main strategies when reducing public spending. Either slices are cut from all activities and the operations rationalized, or the government focuses its resources on key activities. A combination of the two strategies is likely in most cases (retrenchment is time consuming, meets political and union resistance, and commitments can not be abruptly discontinued without social and economic effects). However, governments will over time focus more and more of their scarce resources on the core functions.
The indirect promotion and regulation of a sector implies less precise objectives. Objectives in terms of growth can still be fixed. However, support cannot easily be targeted to specific groups. This is also in line with the discouragement of targeting, for example, credit to the disadvantaged in favour of free competition for the highest return to capital as described above (Tietze, 1994).
It is important that governments seek consistency between macro-economic policies, sectoral policies and plans, and legislation. The main issues to solve with legislation are access to land and water, introduction of species and environmental aspects.
Institutional development is, as discussed earlier, often linked to factors related to incentives, working conditions and job satisfaction. The civil service salary structure is an important measure for incentives. The low, often almost non-existent, salaries for some civil services works against all other inputs for improved institutional performance. This can, however, only be changed by central government, not its aquaculture institutions.
6.2.1 Aquaculture Departments
Aquaculture departments (here understood as the governmental entity responsible for aquaculture whether part of a fisheries, agriculture or any other department) in sub-Saharan Africa cannot expect increasing budgets in the foreseeable future and may have to accept budget cuts. The departments will also come under increasing pressure from the central government to adjust their operations and to increase effectiveness and efficiency.
Departments needs good arguments to retain a fair share of the government budget. They need to document and disseminate information on its activities and their results both to central government and to its "clients" (the private sector, donors and international organizations). They also needs to define their core activities and focus effort and resources to these. This may require restructuring and restaffing of departments. In doing this they have to pose the question of which functions could be performed by others.
The institutional adjustment to the changes will include reorganization within and between departments, new procedures for policy and plan formulation, training of staff, retrenchment of existing staff, and replacement of some staff to staff the institution with the currently required expertise.
Andreasson (1992 a) stressed, when discussing government responses to budget cuts, that no "ready made" recipes should be proposed. Each department should review its situation, its strengths and weaknesses in terms of staff, infrastructure etc and plan for the change. An important aspect of the reviews and planning for change are to seek "partners". As argued below, these partners should be sought in the private sector and among NGOs. Both have long-term commitments to development although for completely different reasons and motives. Also partnership with other governmental institutions can improve performance as can networking with sister organizations in neighbouring countries. The new information technology is cheap and facilitates unorthodox solutions.
6.2.2 Information
Departments need to strengthen information gathering and dissemination. The information unit should gather, compile and disseminate information in an understandable format, utilizing whenever possible available information technologies. These should be accessible, to the producers, producer organizations and others in the private sector (potential investors, potential resources for extension etc), NGO's, extension officers, researchers, administrators, policy makers, international organizations and donors. With proper compilation and dissemination of data and information the department can ensure that the sector and its importance and potential for development are understood.
The requirements for the information unit are small: a librarian, computer, access to information technology for dissemination and a documentation centre. This should be regarded as a key function of the department and reallocations be made in the budget.
6.2.3 Policy and Plan Preparation
Overall policies are set by ministries. The department can influence the specifics of the policies provided its arguments are supported by facts. It was stated above that departments often lack socio-economic and economic expertise to analyze data and information and provide a framework for policy and plan formulations. Can the department hire the expertise in a situation with retrenchments? While the department needs basic capabilities in these field it can augment the capacity by using resources from other departments and governmental bodies, it can hire short term consultants and it may obtain international expertise on a short term basis.
6.2.4 Research and Training
Funds for research and training are also becoming scarce and new approaches are required to maintain a minimum of both for the development of the sector. Coche et. al. (1994) found nineteen research stations in the twelve countries, which were reviewed in sub-Saharan Africa. Most of the stations were operating far below capacity. It can be argued that a country needs one station in each agro-climatic zone to serve the sector. It may not be possible to keep that capacity. The department then has to define priority-zones based on existing fish farming, trends in the development and physical and socio-economic potential for development. Its research efforts should be concentrated on these areas. Other research stations should be disposed of, if possible sold out to the private sector. Further, sub-regional cooperation could also enhance the research capacity by secondment of researchers and bilateral agreements on joint operation of a research facility.
The aquaculture sector is, as has often been stated, a small and young sector in sub-Saharan Africa. The number of people who require training on different levels is therefore limited. Also for training, aquaculture departments have to seek regional, sub-regional or bilateral cooperation with neighbours. The SADC fisheries and aquaculture training programme, which was formulated in early 1990s was such an attempt. Although arguably overambitious and overestimating the need for trained staff in technical disciplines the initiative should be followed up.
6.2.5 Extension and Provision of Inputs
These are the areas where institutional changes could have the most profound impact on government budgets and the effectiveness and efficiency of support to the development of small-scale aquaculture.
Budgets for extension have been reduced. The solution for departments of aquaculture is to look for partners to maintain an effective support to farmers. This can be through
- Liaison with other governmental departments, in first hand the department of agriculture. Liaison with the department of agriculture offers the additional advantage of promoting an integration of the fish farm into the farming system
- Promotion of private sector extension. This can be support to and training of fingerling producers, feed producers, traders and others
Both liaison with other governmental extension services and promotion of private sector extension require a redefinition of the role of the aquaculture officers, technicians and extension workers. In the new institutional arrangements they will function as subject matter specialists, for which they may require additional training. The number of officers required may be reduced, as in the example from Madagascar.
The above implies a reorganization of extension functions within the frame of an existing aquaculture department. However, to become effective more profound institutional changes may in some cases be beneficial. Formal merging of extension services has been done in Zimbabwe and is reportedly being attempted in Zambia. These experiences should be reviewed with respect to the effectiveness to reach targets and target groups.
For the purpose of extension and provision of inputs, mainly fingerlings, governments in the twelve countries reviewed by Coche et. al. (1994) are operating some 200 farms. The government fish farms in the SADC-region are often functioning far below capacity or not functioning at all for their purpose (ALCOM, 1994). Although there was a rationale for the construction of these farms at the early stages of aquaculture development in sub-Saharan Africa, they have a limited role in the future. Budgets have been cut over the last few years for the operation of the stations and it is evident that governments neither can afford, nor intends to continue running the farms. As reported, some countries are attempting to privatize the farms. Alternatively, farms could be leased to private operators.
6.3 International Organizations
How could FAO best serve aquaculture development in the new situation with regard to changes in government policies and the changes in the organization itself?
One important aspect is to continue to develop the normative role. This is done on overall policy levels but could also be on a rather detailed level. One example is work which was initiated in the early 90s on strategies for aquaculture development under different economic situations in rural areas (Wijkstrom, 1991). This type of work would serve planning functions in countries and would benefit from close collaboration between the different units of the fisheries department and between departments. FAO should also maintain its role for collection, analysis and dissemination of data and information.
FAO has the regional organizations and has been expanding its professional competence on regional and sub-regional levels. While this brings the expertise closer to countries in need of assistance and advice, it is important also to keep expertise on a central, global, level.
The field experience of FAO has been generated by its field programme in inter-regional, regional and sub-regional programmes and national projects. The regional and sub-regional programmes have been efficient fora to promote collaboration between countries, for test and demonstration of approaches, methods and technologies and for exchange of information. Three major such programmes, BOBP in South Asia, AQUILA in Latin America, and ALCOM in southern Africa have been or will soon be terminated. The design of such sub-regional programmes has been flexible and allows innovative and unorthodox activities. Within their frame new approaches to how to work with institutions can be tried. One example would be to work directly with NGO's, private companies, producers' associations etc with the consent of the government. Such attempts could demonstrate feasibility to governments and their aquaculture departments and allow them to concentrate on more catalytic activities. So far,
regional and sub-regional collaboration has mainly been fostered through these programmes on governmental level. Regional collaboration between associations, private producers, companies and traders is just as justified and could be promoted. This could cover many areas such as production technology, export/import and trade. One specific area would be to promote the creation and strengthening of private consultancy groups, who could operate on sub-regional level.
The regional programmes, often operating with pilot projects in different countries, have a multi-disciplinary core staff, centrally placed in a sub-region. The staff gain a thorough knowledge of its area of operation and can provide effective and efficient advice and support to member countries. FAO should consider to establish long-term sub-regional (preferably not more than 10-15 countries) programmes in dialogue with member countries and potential donors.
One characteristic of the programmes has been their long-term character. BOBP has been operational since 1979 and ALCOM since 1987. The sub-regional programmes can thus provide the continuity which is not always possible in national projects. The sub-regional programmes would serve, besides support and advice to countries, to maintain FAOs field expertise which is essential for its normative and informative functions.
Other international institutions of importance for aquaculture development are the Asian Institute of Technology, ICLARM, and SEAFDEC. All are located in Asia (ICLARM has operations in Africa). Africa would benefit from a central regional research and development institute or organization. Possibly one research institute in South Africa could emerge as the initiator of the regional institute, which could be a network of institutes with a strong center.
An institutional alternative to the preferable regional and sub-regional programmes is that FAO's regional and sub-regional expertise is provided with operational funds allowing them to undertake extensive surveys and studies, short term consultancy inputs and implementation of pilot projects and, probably the most important function, to promote regional and sub-regional cooperation and exchange of data and information.
6.4 Donor Agencies
Several major donor agencies see their budgets cut and it seems that funds for fisheries and aquaculture diminish. Reasons for donors withdrawing from fisheries and aquaculture can be budget cuts, a need to focus efforts on a few programmes, little priority given the sector by governments and a preconceived understanding of fisheries and aquaculture programmes being less successful than other interventions.
Donors' assistance to the development of aquaculture is required on several levels. One level is political and technical support to the elaboration of international agreements and codes of practice and then to support the implementation of international agreements on regional, sub-regional and national levels. Good coordination between donors and close collaboration with FAO would strengthen the approach.
Donor assistance would be required to build up a network of sub-regional programmes and institutions for aquaculture development. This would be in line with the shift towards institutional twinning and a vehicle to develop such strategies. This could include support for networking also with other international and national institutions in the field of rural aquaculture development, research and training.
On the national level, donor support would effectively support policy and plan formulation, institutional reorganization and strengthening, and the private sector to take over functions from government departments as well as assisting the departments to focus on their main responsibilities.
7. CONCLUSIONS
Most governments in sub-Saharan Africa are adopting policies promoting private sector development, reducing budgets for governmental institutions and rethinking their roles. In this context the promotion and regulation of aquaculture development become the prime tasks and legislation, policies and plans important instruments. Aquaculture institutions need to adjust to these new priorities and strengthen their competences in planning and economics. Environmental aspects, regulated in law, become the major regulatory aspect for small-scale aquaculture development.
Extension is and will be important. Aquaculture institutions have to, in light of unfavourable cost-benefit ratios for extension, decide on types of aquaculture to be actively promoted based on economic analysis. A development towards increased intensity and market orientation among small-scale farmers should in this context be considered as a complement to and natural development from the extensive, subsistence oriented, fish farming in ponds. Martinez-Espinosa (1995) has labelled this "... type II rural aquaculture". Improved cost-effectiveness in extension can also be achieved through integration with agriculture extension systems. However, this will not be sufficient. Aquaculture departments should also seek to promote private sector partners in development; among seed producers, farmers associations etc.
In the process of adjusting the governmental institutions - aquaculture departments - have to withdraw from activities, such as seed production, which can be taken over by the private sector. The majority of governmental fish farms should be reviewed with the aim of privatizing or closing them.
Governments will need support in this process. How could FAO best assist? FAO is going through institutional changes of its own, focusing more on its normative role. This is important also for small-scale aquaculture for example with regard to codes of conduct for introductions and environmental guidelines. In light of the need for support to small-scale fish farming development in sub-Saharan Africa this should be complemented with active support on regional and sub-regional levels. Sub-regional experimental and innovative programmes, with centrally placed multidisciplinary teams of experts, would be a cost-effective way to support institutional change and strengthening and sector development. Such teams could, with the consent of the governments, work directly with provincial or district authorities, NGOs and the private sector. They should, as a complement to the regional commissions and committees, foster sub-regional collaboration on a technical level both in the
governmental and private sectors. One area of support could be to promote the establishment of sub-regional consultancy groups.
An all important factor is funding for development interventions. And funds for small-scale rural aquaculture development are in decline. As shown above the funds required for small-scale aquaculture development, working on the sub-regional levels, are limited.. A sub-regional approach would allow direct support and collaboration with the private sector and NGOs, and using institutional twinning as a method.
A coordinated effort led by governments, with support from FAO as the lead agency in aquaculture and donor agencies would effectively facilitate the required institutional changes and promote a sound development of small-scale aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa.
REFERENCES *
* Apart from the layout, the references are as presented by the author
Ackefors, H., Huner, J.V. & Konikoff, M. (1994). Introduction to the General Principles of Aquaculture. New York: Food Products Press
ALCOM (1988). Technical consultation on aquaculture in rural development, Lusaka, Zambia, 27-30 October 1987 (Report GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP/2). Rome: FAO.
ALCOM (1988a). Formulation mission: Southern African region (November - December 1987). (FI:GCP/INT/436/SWE.3). Rome: FAO.
ALCOM (1988b). Formulation mission: Botswana (March 1988). (FI:GCP/INT/436/SWE.3 Add. 1). Lusaka: FAO.
ALCOM (1991). Round-table meeting on research needs in aquaculture and culture-based fisheries in Zimbabwe. (ALCOM Field Document GCP/INT/436/SWE.18). Harare: FAO.
ALCOM (1993). Report of the Technical Consultation on the enhancement of small water body fisheries in southern Africa, Harare, Zimbabwe, 25-29 January, 1993. (ALCOM Report No. 12). Harare: FAO
ALCOM (1994). Aquaculture into the 21st century in Southern Africa. Report prepared by the Working Group on the Future of ALCOM, (ALCOM Report No. 15). Harare: FAO.
ALCOM (1995). Report on the seminar on aquaculture extension in Zambia. 2-6 October 1995, Kabwe, Zambia. (ALCOM Field Document No. 36). Harare: FAO.
Andersson, G. (1991). Nagra reflektioner om organisationsutveckling iu-land. Erfarenheter av organisationsutveckling i u-land. Stockholm: SIDA.
Andersson, I. & Mubamba, R. (1989). A bibliography of fisheries and aquaculture, Zambia. (GCP/INT/436/SWE.10). Lusaka: FAO.
Andréasson, A. (1992). Long-term commitment to development. ALCOM News, (7), 2-3.
Andréasson, A. (1992a). With budgets shrinking, how can governments strengthen institutions? ALCOM News, (6), 2-3.
Bebbington, A.J., Merril-Sands, D. & Farrington, AJ. (1996). Farmer and community organisations in agricultural research and extension: functions, impacts and questions. IDRCurrents, (11), 23-31.
Van den Berg (1996) The private sector: A potential key element in the development of small-scale aquaculture in Africa. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (12), 14-16.
Brummet, R.E. & B.A. Haight (in print). Research-development linkages. Paper prepared for the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, May 1996, FAO, Rome, Italy. Rome: FAO.
Coche, A (1991). The future of aquaculture in Southern Africa. ALCOM News, (4), 4-8.
Coche, A.G., B. Haight & M. Vincke (1994). Aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa. Synthesis of national reviews and indicative action plan for research (CIFA Technical Paper No. 23). Rome: FAO
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (1995). Rome: FAO.
David e Silva, F. (1993). Legislation concerning small water bodies. ALCOM News, (11), 20-21.
Directorate-General for International Cooperation (1992). Policy Plan for 1992-1996. Southern African Region. The Hague: Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Govereh, J., S.M. Chigume & S. Sen. Socio-economic and marketing constraints to the development of aquaculture and utilisation of small water bodies in Zimbabwe. Agritex Fisheries Unit, FAO/UNDP support for rural aquaculture extention (ZIM/88/021).
FAO, UNDP & Norway (1987). Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture. Joint study by United Nations Development Programme, Norwegian Ministry of Development Cooperation and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome: FAO.
Harrison, E. (1994): Fish farming in Africa? What's the catch? Summary report of ODA-supported research project "Aquaculture development in Sub-Saharan Africa". University of Sussex.
Harrison, E. (in print): Options for small-scale rural aquaculture development. A discussion paper. Introductory overview paper prepared for the Consultation on Small-Scale Aquaculture, Rome, FAO HQ, May 1995. Rome: FAO
Hecht, T. (1992). Aquaculture in South Africa. World Aquaculture, 23(1), 7-19.
Hecht, T. (1994). Aquaculture in South Africa: Where is it now? Where is it going? ALCOM News, (16), 5-10.
Houtte van, A.R., N. Bonucci & W. R. Edeson (1989). A preliminary review of selected legislation governing aquaculture. (ACDP/REP/89/42). Rome: FAO.
Holmén, H. & Jirstrom, M. (1996). Second thoughts about NGOs as triggers for development. IRDCurrents, (11), 8-17
ICLARM & GTZ (1991). The context of small-scale integrated agriculture aquaculture systems in Africa: a case study of Malawi. (ICLARM Stud. Rev. 18).
Jensen, A., van den Berg, F. & Janssen, J. (1994). Privatization of rural extension - is it possible? ALCOM News, (13), 2-5.
Kapetsky, J (1994). The potential for warm water aquaculture in the SADC countries. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (6), 2-6.
Kartzow de, A., P. Van der Heijden & J. Van der Schoot (1992). Integration offish farming into the farm-household system in Luapula Province, Zambia. (ALCOM Field Document No. 16). Harare: FAO.
Kouka, P-J. (in print). The Use of Macro-Economic Information in the Identification and Formulation of Policies and Plans for Rural Aquaculture Development. Paper prepared for the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, 28-31 May 1996, FAO, Rome, Italy. Rome: FAO.
Leth-Nissen, Soeren (1995). What happened in Eastern Province? ALCOM News, (18), 8-9, 12.
Madhu, S.R. (1991). Aquaculture research in Zimbabwe: Where is it now? Where is it going? ALCOM News, (4), 17-18.
Madhu, S.R. (1992). Stimulating aquaculture in Southern Africa - the ALCOM experience. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (2), 5-7.
Martinez-Espinosa, M. (1995). Development of type II rural aquaculture in Latin America. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (11)6-10.
Melander, R. & K. Nilsson (1991). The fishing net industry in SADCC. (Fisheries Development series 59). Göteborg: Swedmar.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. & H.W. van der Mheen (1988). Field testing of aquaculture in Eastern Province, Zambia. (FI:GCP/INT/436/SWE.6). Lusaka: FAO.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. (1991) Adoption offish farming: Promoting and inhibiting factors in Eastern Province, Zambia. (GCP/INT/436/SWE.13). Harare: FAO.
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. (1995). Report of the Technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Smallholder Fish Farming in Southern Africa. (GCP/INT/555/SWE). Harare: FAO
Van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. (1995). Aquaculture extension guidelines for small-scale farmers. Based on experiences from a pilot project in Eastern Province, Zambia. (ALCOM Report No. 16). Harare: FAO.
Moore, M. (1995): Institution building as a development assistance method. A review of literature and ideas. (SIDA Evaluation Report 1). Stockholm, 1995
Msuya, F. (1993): Seaweed farming in Zanzibar. An amazing story. ALCOM News, (11), 11-16.
Msuya, E.F. & A.J. Mochi (1995). The seaweed farming industry in Zanzibar. Swedmar Review, (November), 17-21.
Nermark, U.P. & Mmopelwa, T.G. (1994). Utilization of small water bodies, Botswana: Report of activities towards fisheries exploitation, 1992-1993. (ALCOM Field Document No. 29). Harare: FAO.
Nilsson et al. (1994). Adoption and viability criteria for semi-intensive fish farming: A report on a socio-economic study in Ruvuma and Mbeya regions, Tanzania. (ALCOM Field Document No. 28). Harare: FAO.
Nilsson, H. & K. Wetengere (1994). Adoption and viability criteria for semi-intensive fish farming. A report on a socio-economic study in Ruvuma and Mbeya regions, Tanzania (ALCOM Field Document No. 28). Harare: FAO.
NORAD (1994). Manual for programme and project cycle management. Oslo: NORAD.
Pedini, M. (1992). An overview of FAO's role in support of aquaculture development. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (1), 2-5.
Pedini, M. (1993). The FAO Field Programme. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (3), 14-16.
Pedini, M. (1994). FAO and the Strategy for International Fisheries Research (SIFR). The aquaculture component. FAO Aquaculture Newsletter, (6), 7-10.
Sayagues, M. (1995). Community management of fisheries. Can it work? ALCOM News, (19), 5-6.
Sen, S. (1991). Seaweed collection and culture in Tanzania. (GCP/INT/436/SWE.14). Harare: FAO.
Sen, S., van der Mheen, H. & van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. (in print). The place of aquaculture in rural development. Paper prepared for the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, 28-31 May 1996. FAO, Rome. Rome: FAO
SIDA (1990). Metodhandbok 90. Stockholm: SIDA.
Sorensen, J.C. & McCreary, S.T. (1990). Institutional arrangements for managing coastal resources and environments (Rev. 2. ed.). (Renewable resources information series. Coastal management publication 1). Washington D.C.: U.S. National Park Service.
Tietze, U. (1994). Elements of successful fisheries credit policies and procedures. ALCOM News, (13), 7-11.
Wijkstrom, U. & H. Aase (1989). Fish farmers in rural communities: Results of a socio-economic pilot survey in Northern Province of Zambia. (GCP/INT/436/SWE.5). Lusaka: FAO
Wijkstrom, U. (1991). How fish culture can stimulate economic growth: Conclusions from fish farmer surveys in Zambia. (ALCOM Report No. 9). Harare: Rome.
Wijkstrom, U. & R. Larsson (1992). Fish farmers in rural communities: Results of a survey in Northwestern Province of Zambia. (ALCOM Field Document No. 8). Harare: FAO.
Wijkstrom, U. (1992). Notes for a technical seminar on aquaculture and economic growth. (ALCOM Field Document No. 19). Harare: FAO
<section>b</section>
Appendix 5: Research-Development Linkages
1. AQUACULTURE AND THE SMALL-SCALE FARMER
2. THE RESEARCH-EXTENSION-FARMER CONTINUUM
3. A NEW EXTENSION-RESEARCH RELATIONSHIP
4. INFORMATION AND APPROPRIATE RESEARCH
5. AQUACULTURE RESEARCH CAPABILITIES
REFERENCES *
1. AQUACULTURE AND THE SMALL-SCALE FARMER
1.1 The Context of Rural Aquaculture
1.2 What Constrains the Adoption of Aquaculture by Small-Scale Farmers?
1.1 The Context of Rural Aquaculture
Rural small-scale farmers carry out their farming activities in a complex physical and socio-economic environment, the elements of which have been addressed in the context of rural aquaculture by other thematic papers at this consultation. Research and extension provide methods and tools for understanding this environment, developing improved farming technologies and promoting their adoption by farmers.
Whether a farmer adopts a given farming activity depends on three broad factors: knowledge of the farming technology, access to the means of production required by this technology, and the motivation to adopt based on a perception of an overall benefit if the technology is applied to the available means. In the setting of the rural small-scale farmer, none of these closely inter-related factors is simple, yet they must be reduced to researchable elements if new technologies are to be developed and promoted for adoption.
Aquaculture is a relatively new farming activity in many developing countries. Even in those areas where aquaculture has been practiced for centuries, it has only recently be subject to rigorous scientific research and technological development. These efforts have not always been successful, for reasons relating to technical, socio-economic, policy and institutional aspects of aquaculture (FAO/NORAD/UNDP 1984; Harrison et al 1994). Besides the lack of adoption by farmers, there has not been a reasonable return on the large amount of development assistance which has been applied to the aquaculture sector.
However, contrary to the prevailing opinion among many development professionals (e.g., Cross 1991; Lazard et al. 1991), the development and extension of aquaculture techniques to small-scale farmers has not been a total failure. The sustained adoption and spread of small-scale fish farming has in many cases been quite remarkable:
· In Rwanda, the National Fish Culture Project rehabilitated 1,061 ponds, built 661 new ponds and increased fish production by 425% over a five-year period from 1983 (Nathanaël and Moehl 1989). The gains made were sustained for at least eight years (Molnar et al. 1991).
· From 1982 through 1989 more than 1,200 ponds were built or rehabilitated in Guatemala, producing approximately 100 tons of fish annually and growing at a rate of 15% per annum (Castillo et al. 1992).
· In a single year (1991), extension efforts in Bangladesh sustainably transferred Puntius gonionotus culture to 91% of the 1,725 small-scale farmers approached in the target area (Gupta and Rab 1994).
· Aquaculture in Eastern Province, Zambia grew from 12 functioning fish ponds in 1987 to 649 in 1992 to 1164 in 1995 with support from combined agriculture/aquaculture extension agents (Chimfwembe 1995; Ngenda 1995).
· Fish farming in the Southern Region of Malawi increased from 429 farms in 1988 to 1517 farms in 1995 with extension focusing on group and mass-media techniques (Scholz and Chimatiro 1995).
· Fingerling demand by Malagasy carp farmers rose from 100,000 in 1985 to almost 1.5 million in 1992 during a period when extension focused on training and strengthening private fingerling producers (van den Berg 1994).
· Over five years, from 1991 to 1995, the number offish ponds in the Arusha region of Tanzania increased from 678 to 1,100 based on an extension strategy of providing no external inputs other than advice provided by local volunteers trained by an NGO (Murnyak and Mafwenga 1995).
Most of these achievements have involved externally-funded projects and. while having significant impact on farmers in the project areas, the approaches used have not always been economically sustainable by farmers (Harrison 1994a; Vincke 1995). Even when the technology package could have been sustained on the farm, the extension approach was seldom sustainably adopted by the national extension services (Coche et al. 1994). Growth in production and adoption rates have therefore tended to stagnate as soon as the project ends (OECD 1989). At the national level, the growth in fish production has not been as large as was predicted and has failed to keep up with the growing population (Figure 1).
Figure 1: The role of projects in encouraging sustained adoption of aquaculture technology
The experience of the many projects, however, demonstrates that aquaculture can be a viable enterprise for small-scale producers and that gains in economic and food security goals can be achieved at reasonable cost (Kapetsky 1995; Kent 1995). In addition, the various aquaculture development and extension projects have accumulated a wide range of experiences and substantially strengthened the knowledge base upon which more progressive and efficacious rural development strategies can be founded (Harrison 1994a). The task at hand is to synthesize what has been learned about small-scale aquaculture in order to improve the development of policy, technology, extension and institutional support. The new knowledge can be used as input to modify the national research and extension services so that they function effectively to meet the needs of small-scale farmers.
1.2 What Constrains the Adoption of Aquaculture by Small-Scale Farmers?
To develop a more effective research and extension approach to fish farming development, we must first understand what has limited the success of previous approaches, which have focused on a narrow measure of economic viability offish farming technologies. Although the economic viability of small-scale aquaculture has been repeatedly demonstrated at a variety of intensities (Popma et al. 1984; Hatch and Hanson 1992; Lightfoot et al. 1992), many farmers ignore not only aquaculture, but a wide range of agricultural innovations regardless of their profitability (Gomez 1994; Nxumalo 1995), indicating that there must be more to the farmer's decision-making than simple economics (Harrison 1994a; Harrison et al. 1994).
Evidence from farmer-participatory extension and research projects indicates that smallholders view their farms as personalized and often chaotic conglomerations rather than as systematic collections of discreet enterprises (c.f. Scoones and Thompson 1994) for which farmers often lack mental tools for holistic interpretation (Lightfoot and Minnick 1991). These conglomerations are interconnected in various and complex ways with external systems such as the household and the surrounding community (Molnar et al. 1991; Harrison 1994b). The success or failure of an individual enterprise is not infrequently attributed to supernatural causes (Grover et al. 1980; Rist 1995). While some farm enterprises are managed systematically (not necessarily scientifically) and are amenable to farmer experimentation, improvement and economic analysis (Stolzenbach 1994), others are managed according to tradition, regardless of how scientists might evaluate their economic viability (Castillo et
al. 1992; World Bank et al 1992; Vel 1995).
The vast majority of aquaculture research and development exercises have been designed around the incorrect assumption that small-scale farmers evaluate the incorporation of a fish pond into their farm in isolation from other options and fanning activities. Small-scale farms are, however, not simple systems which are easily amenable to economic description. Most farmers weigh a wide variety of variables when deciding whether or not to adopt a new technology (Gupta 1992; Wijkstrom 1992). Men and women weigh different variables differently at different times (Ademola 1994). Getting aquaculture onto a farm is thus not simply a matter of demonstrating its technical or economic viability (Brummett and Noble 1995a). As a minimum, the technology must be dramatically more productive (and possibly profitable, depending upon the goals of the farmer) than currently applied methods and must be fairly easy to incorporate into the existing farm system (Figure 2). Studies in Asia have
shown that farmers will only adopt new farming approaches if they are at least 30% better than traditional practices (Gomez, 1994). Chikafumbwa (1994) found that Malawian rice or fish farmers were much more likely to adopt integrated rice-fish farming than were farmers who knew neither technology.
Figure 2: The interplay between perceived impact and ease of adoption in the acceptance of new technology by small-scale farmers
Using qualitative choice modeling, Poison and Spencer (1991) identified farm size, age of household head, farm income, migrant status of the farming household, and land ownership as important farm characteristics which influence the adoption of new cassava varieties in Nigeria. All of the farmers in their study were well-aware of the benefits of the new variety, but many still decided not to adopt.
Small-scale farms are not only internally complex. They are also highly variable over space and time, both agroecologically and socioculturally (Mandima 1995). This variability can have a major impact on the up-take of technology. Poison and Spencer (1991) cite work in Nigeria which found that adoption rates of new cassava varieties among adjacent fanning communities, with similar social structures, cultures and land types, ranged between 5 and 80%. This implies that there is a important idiosyncratic component to small-scale farming systems evolution. While findings of this type, and those described above, may not surprise field workers, the complex reality of small-scale farming systems is too seldom considered when research and development is being planned (Cross 1991).
2. THE RESEARCH-EXTENSION-FARMER CONTINUUM
Technological innovations which solve farmers' real problems and are not simply ends in themselves must be designed around a clear understanding of the problem they are meant to resolve. For this to occur, researchers must learn how small-scale farming systems function and relate to their surrounding environment before beginning a program of research (Mandima 1995).
Researchers too often work at intellectual levels and reside in physical locations which are difficult for farmers to access directly (Chambers 1986). Education levels of farmers and the research community are often very different. Researchers tend to be housed in universities or research centers which are generally located in or near cities and thus are not likely to encounter many farmers in their daily transactions. When farmers do appear on campus, they are often brought there in the role of receivers, rather than disseminators, of information.
Traditionally, the extension service has been given the task of acting as an intermediary between researchers and the farming community (Figure 3). The extension agent is supposed to go out to the farm, collect information about both perceived and unperceived needs of farmers, and transmit it to scientists. The scientists are then supposed to design appropriate solutions and give them to extension agents who are supposed to pass them along to the farmers (Elwell 1992; MacKay 1992).
Figure 3: The Research-Extension-Farmer continuum as it currently exists in many developing countries
The system seldom works as designed (INTERPAKS 1984; Bunting 1986). Extension often fails to accurately perceive the situation of the farmers and transmits to researchers misinformation or none at all. Researchers consequently drift off course and begin concentrating on topics which they find personally interesting, but for which there may be no practical application in small-scale farming systems. When findings generated under such circumstances are transmitted to extension agents, they are out of context and thus seldom properly understood. In the end, the farmers receive either no advice, advice for which they have no use, or advice which, since it was only partially understood by the extension agent, is incomplete and difficult to apply.
The fault for the breakdown is both functional and structural (Coche et al. 1994). Training for aquaculture extension agents is often inadequate preparation for what is arguably the most difficult aspect of technology development and transfer (Haight 1995). Aquaculture extension agents are typically trained in only the most basic aspects of the technology they are expected to disseminate. They seldom understand the underlying principles of aquaculture and consequently lack the flexibility they need to fit fish farming into the highly personalized farming systems described above (Brummett 1994a; van der Mheen 1996). Consequently, although information does flow to farmers (Figure 3), the quality of this information is not always very high (INTERPAKS 1984). The farmers perceive this and, more often than not, wisely refuse to adopt it.
Extension agents only rarely receive training in the interpersonal and communication skills which are essential for the efficient transmission of information between persons of different education levels (Harrison et al. 1994). Being government officers and having received at least some secondary education, extension agents often scorn the rural people who they are supposed to help (Weeks 1990), an attitude which is usually self-apparent enough to engender in the farmers a reciprocal sentiment (Mutsekwa 1995). If this attitude problem is compounded by an extension agent's having attempted to pass on (and in some situations having actually forced farmers to accept through fines or other punitive measures) what the farming community regards as obviously bad advice, the likelihood that useful information will flow from farmers to extension agents and thence to research is substantially diminished (Cox 1986).
Extension in most developing countries is the entry-level function in government departments dealing with small-scale farming development, including aquaculture (Figure 4). Since high quality human resources are usually in short supply, there is a high degree of upward mobility in government services (Cox 1986). Hence, extension personnel who perform well and have superior capabilities are quickly removed from the field, given additional training, and end up working in laboratories or behind desks. Left in the extension services are inexperienced young people and older people who were judged by their superiors as unsuitable for promotion. To make matters worse, these more senior extension agents often hold the posts which regulate the younger and junior staff, thus ensuring that any new ideas and approaches which improved training might have encouraged in the new generation will receive a chilly reception.
Figure 4: The relative positions of administration, research and extension in many bureaucracies
Government services in developing countries often suffer from inadequate funding. It is not surprising that extension, which is often viewed as a low-level job, also receives minimal financial support. Furthermore, the payback from such dispersed activities as small-scale aquaculture is difficult to document (see Theme 1). Transportation, facilities and essential equipment for data collection and analysis are expensive and thus often in short supply, and salaries are often not sufficient to cover the cost of living for staff. Couple this with inadequate training, and it should be no surprise that the information collection and transmission capabilities of the majority of extension agents is less than what it should be.
In the traditional research-extension-farmer continuum (Figure 3), whatever information extension agents manage to collect must be transmitted to research if problems are to be scientifically investigated and resolved. Unfortunately, extension and research are often housed separately, often in entirely different government departments and hence seldom interact with each other. Extension agents are not invited to research meetings and vice versa. Researchers tend to scorn the more poorly educated extension agents, just as the extension agents scorn the farmers. None of these conditions creates an atmosphere conducive to the flow in information.
While it is generally acknowledged that high quality information is not flowing (INTERPAKS 1984), no one cares to take responsibility for making sure that the situation is corrected. Each side of the extension-research linkage tends to blame the other for not getting the job done. Extension agents accuse researchers of living in ivory towers and being more interested in publishing arcane research in obscure journals than dealing with the messy realities of rural development (Oram et al. 1979). Researchers insist that the information which they receive from extension agents is inadequate, and when solutions are proposed they are not properly conveyed to the farmers.
3. A NEW EXTENSION-RESEARCH RELATIONSHIP
3.1 Institutional Setting
3.2 New Job Descriptions
3.1 Institutional Setting
In the traditional view depicted in Figure 3, extension is clearly the key to information flow both to and from researchers and farmers. Extension agents are expected to be half scientist and half farmer, able to pick up and understand a technical journal article, put it into the specific context of his or her target community, and then communicate the information effectively to practical-minded farmers who have limited formal education. To make the system function as designed, the human and physical resources allocated to the extension services must be substantially improved over what they are today. Extension agents must be adequately trained and supported in their work (van der Mheen 1996). The institutional framework in which field work is viewed as unprestigious and a sump for unproductive or junior staff must be revised to give high quality extension professionals the opportunity for personal advancement while keeping them in productive contact with farming
communities. This will be enhanced by being able to document the positive contribution of aquaculture to farmers' livelihoods.
How these tasks are to be accomplished in light of the developing world's current level of indebtedness and the donor community's increasing frustration is not easy to predict. The alarming rate of impoverishment and environmental destruction in many of the developing countries necessitates that action to improve the lot of rural communities be taken quickly (McCalla 1994). Even if the money to revamp the extension services were made available today, it will still be extremely difficult to see how substantial gains could be made in a short enough period of time to be meaningful for the current generation, and the longer we wait, the worse the problem becomes.
Training and institutional reform of the extension services are, of course, absolutely essential for the long term growth and viability of agriculture in developing countries, but short term solutions are also needed. Since the bulk of quality education has been provided to the research side of the research-extension equation, it seems reasonable to shift some responsibility in that direction in order to meet short-term objectives. If our short-term solutions work, it may well preclude the need for the old structure entirely and pave the way for a completely new approach to technology development and transfer.
3.2 New Job Descriptions
Although extension agents in developing countries are nowhere plentiful, they are everywhere vastly more numerous than researchers. Short-circuiting the researcher-extension-farmer continuum to preclude extension, while possibly improving the flow of information in the specific target areas in which a researcher happened to be working, would actually reduce the total amount of information reaching the rural areas. In addition, the fact that most researchers live, study and teach in or near cities would shift the focus of outreach towards the urban centers and further marginalize remoter regions.
Researchers must, however, take the lead in interpreting research results and developing extension messages. Since most researchers are skilled at the former but have only a vague idea about how to approach the latter (AIT Aquaculture 1994), the context for a closer research-extension relationship is established. Farmers' problems identified by extension should be communicated directly to researchers (Dioné and Bedingar 1995). (Tools for problems identification, such as PRA and RRA, are considered under Themes 1 and 2). Available data pertinent to that particular problem can then be processed, tabulated and condensed by the researcher into a solution comprehensible to the extension agents. If a particular solution is unacceptable to extension, because it does not solve the farmers' problem or is not practical, then it should be examined jointly by both research and extension and an approach work out which is both understandable and scientifically accurate.
The venue for this research-extension dialogue will be different for different countries, cultures and bureaucracies. Joint staff meetings or representation by research at extension meetings and vice versa are possibilities. Conducting joint demonstrations to farmers has been used as a means of getting research and extension together (Noble and Rashidi 1990). Another mechanism which might be useful is to have researchers and extension personnel conduct joint experiments. Such research projects would not only bring scientists and extension staff into contact with each other. It would have the added benefit of encouraging extension agents to study the underlying principles of aquaculture in a controlled fashion.
It would remain the responsibility of the extension agents to reprocess the materials given them by researchers into forms which suit whichever extension methodologies they are utilizing and disseminate them as widely as possible. Since the normal reason given by extension agents for the failure of their particular technology to be widely adopted by farmers is that the message provided by research was inadequate or inappropriate, obliging the agents to agree in consultation with researchers that the message is clear and to the point will permit the critical analysis of the extension methodology independently of the technology itself ^1. Needs for training in extension approaches and communication skills could be more accurately identified. In addition, the job performance of researchers could be at least partly evaluated on the basis of their success in transferring information to extension and not so exclusively on their scientific publications (AIT Aquaculture 1994;
Christensen 1994).
^1 The efficacy of various extension approaches and methodologies is the subject of other background papers.
Consultation with extension agents would also provide researchers with valuable insights into the problems and constraints faced by both farmers and extension. Although imperfect to the extent that the ability of extension to correctly interpret the rural situation is imperfect, such input would represent a considerable improvement over the present situation (Noble and Costa-Pierce 1992). The establishment of a direct relationship between farmers and researchers for purposes of problem identification would complete the flow of information.
4. INFORMATION AND APPROPRIATE RESEARCH
4.1 Relevancy and Quality of Information
4.2 Systems-Level Analysis
4.3 Farmer-Participatory Research
4.1 Relevancy and Quality of Information
Redefining the relative roles of extension and research in technology packaging may help improve the relevancy and quality of information proceeding from research institutions through extension to farmers. Much of what is currently known about small-scale aquaculture, but which has been languishing in libraries for lack of an extension agent who could deliver them to farmers, might be rapidly moved onto the farm in this way. However, it still remains to get information about what's really happening in rural communities into the laboratory if technologies are to be developed which are truly useful to farmers.
And new technologies are desperately needed (Schultz 1986). Since it was largely based on the erroneous assumption that aquaculture innovation could be evaluated independently of other farm activities, most aquaculture research has been aimed at the fishpond in isolation (Huisman 1990). While such research is perfectly valid for commercial fish-only agrobusinesses (Bailey and Skladany 1989), there is little demand for the data it generates among resource-poor, small-scale farmers who employ mixed-cropping systems (Githinji and Perrings 1993) and eat more of their produce than they sell for cash (Castillo et al. 1992; Gupta et al. 1992; Brummett and Chikafumbwa 1995).
For example, a great deal of research effort has gone into the investigation of inorganic fertilizer use in small-scale fish fanning and practically no fish farmers ever use inorganic fertilizers. While eminently justifiable in economic and productivity terms the applicability of such technology when put into the context of the small-scale farmer is highly questionable. Consider that for the majority of small-scale fanning communities:
· inorganic fertilizers have always been scarce (Izac and Swift 1994) and their availability is actually declining (Coulibaly and Sanders 1995; Masters and Sanders 1995);
· many members lack access to credit and thus cannot afford fertilizers even when they are available (Reardon et al. 1995);
· small-scale aquaculture is a secondary activity (Wijkstrom 1991) so any fertilizers which make their way onto the farm are used almost exclusively on the staple crop (Brummett 1994b).
There is nothing new in this list. If research has continued to develop new strategies for the application of inorganic fertilizers in small-scale fish fanning, it is only because the orientation of aquaculture scientists prevented them from knowing or caring that the raw materials for their technologies were not available to the proposed user group (OECD 1989).
In addition, much of the appropriate research which has been conducted has too often been repetitive and has contributed little to the knowledge base (AIT Aquaculture 1994). Chicken-fish integration, for example, has been studied in detail for almost 20 years (Hopkins and Cruz 1982) yet remains an active part of many developing country research programs (Coche et al. 1994). Such exercises have real value only as extension tools and training opportunities for extension agents and should be viewed as such and not deducted from already scanty research budgets (Brummett 1994c).
Researchers must get to work on finding realistic solutions to farmers' real problems (AIT Aquaculture 1994). To do this will require the intimate knowledge of small-scale farmers and their farming system which has been impossible to obtain under the traditional research-extension-farmer continuum approach (World Bank et al 1992). Scientists must get out of their laboratories and on to the farm (CIMMYT 1986).
4.2 Systems-Level Analysis
Most science is conducted in a reductionist manner. That is, problems are broken down into their constituent sub-problems, each of which is independently analyzed. The bits are then reassembled. This is the essence of computer modeling and it works well for many sorts of systems. It does not work well for analyzing small-scale fanning systems in which the whole is always more than a sum of the constituent parts (Ruddle 1993).
Just going out to the farm does not mean that the scientist will immediately be able to overcome years of training in reductionism and actually see what is happening on the small-scale farm. New tools for holistically visualizing the farming system and introducing the farmer's perspective into the analysis must be learned (Goldsworthy et al. 1994a). While more complicated than the reductionist approach, scientists must acknowledge that a much broader range of factors than soil character, rainfall and seed genotype go into determining the productivity of a small-scale farmer's crop (Nilsson and Wetengere 1994).
A wide range of approaches to the problem of farming systems analysis have been tried (Cornwall et al 1994). The main feature of most of these is the participation of farmers in some sort of village or farm resource inventory. The generation of farming system maps (Figure 5) is a common tool. Farming system mapping exercises are conducted between scientists and individual farmers or groups of farmers and serve primarily as the basis for discussion about how the various components of the farming system and how they relate. Properly done, both scientists and farmers come away with a broader perspective of how the farm functions (Lightfoot et al. 1991; Lightfoot and Minnick 1991).
Figure 5: One type of farming system map generated in discussion between scientists and a Malawian small-scale farmer (from Brummett and Chikafumbwa; 1995)
Farming system mapping exercises provide only the starting point from which research projects can be designed (Lightfoot and Pullin 1995). They are largely qualitative and not always easy to interpret. Subsidiary data collected during the course of the mapping exercise is often far more important than the map itself, but again, are difficult to analyze qualitatively (Noble 1994). Carefully structured interviews are often used to fill in gaps and collect more easily quantifiable social data (Wijkstrom and Aase 1989; Molnar et al. 1991; Mandima 1995).
The high degree of variability within and among farming communities must be considered when both designing and applying systems level research (Poison and Spencer 1991). In addition, farm analysis must also be made over a sufficiently long period of time to incorporate temporal variability (Ruddle 1993; Goldsworthy et al. 1994a; Izac and Swift 1994).
Farming systems analysis is still in its infancy and quantitative tools are few (Izac and Swift 1994). Many studies have been poorly controlled and/or reflect conditions on a very narrow range of farm over a very short time period and are hence not very useful for drawing general conclusions (Kessler and Moolhuijzen 1994). The Research Tools for Natural Resource Systems Monitoring and Evaluation (RESTORE) software developed by the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) is one approach to the problem of converting mapping and interview data into quantitative experimental designs (ICLARM 1993). Land Use Systems Analysis (LUSA) developed by the Consortium for sustainable use of inland valleys in sub-Saharan Africa is another (van Duivenbooden 1995). Both of these tools use mapping, interview and measurement data (collected directly by scientists) gathered over time to generate a quantitative image of how farming systems function and evolve.
In many developing countries, aquaculture research is almost exclusively the domain of biologists and ecologists (Coche 1995). A key aspect of farming systems study is its necessarily multidisciplinary nature (Lightfoot et al. 1993). Since small-scale farms are closely adapted to both the sociocultural and agroecological environments (Rist 1995; Vel 1995) correct interpretation requires input from social, economic, anthropological, biological, ecological and agricultural scientists (Bunting 1986; Goldsworthy et al. 1994a). Although multidisciplinary approaches to problem-solving also have trouble producing quantifiable results, they are clearly important if the complex nature of small-scale farming systems is to be fully comprehended (Ranaweera et al. 1993).
Despite the shortage of quantitative methods in fanning systems analysis, the importance of the central idea remains: small-scale farming systems must be dealt with holistically if they are to be accurately understood (Ranaweera et al. 1993; Goldsworthy et al. 1994b). For research to be more widely adopted by small-scale farmers scientists need to find some way of incorporating an appreciation of these diverse systems into their experimental designs (Bunting 1986).
4.3 Farmer-Participatory Research
Scientists have long acknowledged the need to relate their findings to farm conditions. The common practice of setting up field trials is supposed to test experiment station results on cooperating farmer's fields. While logical from the point of view of scientists, these farm trials have one serious drawback: the conduct of the test relies on very little input from the farmers, either before or after the trial (Fagi and Suriapermana 1992). Farmers are given very clear instructions on how to conduct trials which were designed on the basis of laboratory experiments which, in turn, were based on a faulty understanding of the small-scale farmer's decision-making and resource allocation systems. When the results of these trials are analyzed, the almost universally lower production achieved by the farmer is attributed to the farmers lack of knowledge, the poor quality of farm soils, etc. It's unusual to hear anyone say of such trials that they didn't work well, because the
technology being tested was not appropriate to the farmer's actual situation. The basic problem which limits the impact of research conducted exclusively on the experiment station influences the adoptability of farm trials: the scientist's perspective prevails at all levels (Chambers 1986). The farm is simply a temporary extension of the experiment station.
From field trials have evolved new methodologies for conceiving and conducting research in which the farmer's perspective is fully appreciated and farmers are incorporated into the research process from the very beginning. Some of these are highly political and/or based on philosophical principles and ideas which only secondarily deal with agricultural innovation. More valuable to our discussion are those farmer-participatory approaches which hope to capitalize on the strengths of modem science and traditional knowledge bases to move small-scale fanning systems in a direction which will enable them to adapt to the changing environmental and social circumstances of development (Reijntjes et al. 1992; Padilla 1993). Such methods have been discussed at length by Chambers et al. (1989) and Scoones and Thompson (1994). CIMMYT (1986) presented a generalized system for farming systems/participatory research and development which describes most of the key components (Figure 6).
While all applications of this general model are slightly different, most begin with a systems approach and some sort of farm resource mapping exercise as described above. Another common element is that farmers provide input into the choice of research topics and the materials and methods to be used. This is generally done by presenting farmers with a range of possible technologies which he or she might find useful and then letting the farmer choose which best meets his or her needs (Stilwell 1995). After the experiment is finished, the researchers make a serious effort to relate the findings to farmers in terms the farmers understand (Hopkins 1988; Brummett and Noble 1995).
Figure 6: A generalized farming systems based, participatory research and development methodology from CIMMYT (1986)
Letting the farmer choose is essential if the vast array of sociocultural constraints to the adoption of technology are to be successfully overcome (Schreiber and Hill 1993; van der Mheen-Sluijer 1995). Only the farmer can put the proposed new enterprise into proper Context within the farm and its surrounding environment. Since farms vary widely in their socioeconomic characteristics (Leelapatra et al. 1992; Mandima 1995) it is probably not possible to undertake a careful analysis of each farm in order to identify critical social and economic constraints. It is much more direct to let each farmer conduct his or her own personal analysis and then choose the technology which minimizes negative consequences of adoption (Cox 1986).
Once again, providing for scientific controls for many of these type of studies is difficult. Every small-scale farmer and farm is different and making generalizations is risky (CIMMYT 1986; Lazard 1992). Some researchers get around this problem by insisting that modem scientific protocols are not universal and controls and other accouterments of the scientific method are not necessarily needed (Rist 1995). Others are working to find creative ways to meet the rigorous demands of analytical science while not overly influencing the farmer's decisions and thus getting too far away from the basic principle of letting the farmer choose (Stilwell 1995),
One farmer-participatory research methodology which was developed specifically for small-scale aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa is described by Brummett and Noble (1995b). In this approach, average values for inputs and management strategies employed by farmers are used to establish the control conditions for replicated experiment station trials. Whichever method is used, and a strict adherence to any particular method is probably not very useful anyway (Stilwell 1995), the basic concept of farmer-participatory research is that it forces the researcher to: 1) study the farm and the constraints faced by farmers in concert with farmers and, 2) look at technological innovation and farm management from the farmer's perspective (Leelapatra et al. 1992; Buadaeng and van Eckert 1993).
A general model for how the system proposed here might work has been successfully tested in Bangladesh by Gupta et al. (1992). Farmer participatory, on-farm and on-station research methods, including resource mapping exercises were used by scientists to develop a simple technology which was disseminated by extension staff from a local non-government organization (NGO) to 309 farmers. A follow-up survey found that 90% of the farmers had adopted the technology package and were planning on expanding the role of aquaculture on their farms (Gupta et al. 1992).
5. AQUACULTURE RESEARCH CAPABILITIES
It is all well and good to discuss what researchers should do to improve the relevance of their scientific work to small-scale farmers; it is something else to actually do the work. Research in developing countries is hampered by many of the same constraints as extension (Bunting 1986; Christensen 1994; Coche et al. 1994). Education of researchers is focused on techniques and methodologies which are not always appropriate to their situation (Gaillard 1990). While numbers of scientists have risen over the last decade, overall funding by national programs has decreased, dramatically reducing the availability of funds per researcher (Pardey et al. 1995). Salaries and working conditions for scientists in developing country institutions are often substandard (World Bank et al. 1992). Teaching and administrative responsibilities distract university-based scientists from research (Schultz 1986). Aquaculture policy often emphasizes the study of systems and approaches which are not
sensitive to the needs of the small-scale producer (Coche 1995). Scientists in developing countries are often young and have too little experience to overcome such problems on their own (Bunting 1986).
In the longer term, revitalization of the scientific establishment in developing countries is essential if these are to keep pace with the rapidly changing global economy (Spurling et al. 1992). Addressing the immediate needs of small-scale farmers is, however, not a highly capital-intensive activity. Researchers have in hand many of the basic technologies for use in the farmer-participatory research methodologies described above. The application and incremental modification of the available technology would generate new knowledge of interest to a wide variety of scientists and provide highly relevant information to farmers. Expensive equipment is seldom needed to do such work. Thus, in the short-term, directing research at the problems faced by small-scale farmers might actually help reduce the conflict between the desire to produce quality results and the imperatives imposed by shrinking budgets. It might also, in the longer term lead aquaculture research away from a focus
on high-production/high pollution farming systems to those which might be more socially and environmentally sustainable (World Bank et al. 1992; Williams 1995).
REFERENCES *
* Apart from the layout, the references are as presented by the author
Ademola, A. 1994. Women farmers in Ondo State, Nigeria. Journal of Anthropological Research 50:311-326.
AIT Aquaculture. 1994. Partners in development: the promotion of sustainable aquaculture. Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand.
Bailey, C. and M. Skladany. 1989. The political economy of aquaculture development in the third world. ICA Communicae 12(1-2):6-7. International Center for Aquaculture and Aquatic Environments, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Brummett, R.E. 1994a. Training in African aquaculture development. NAGA, the ICLARM Quarterly 17(2):4-6.
Brummett, R.E. 1994b. The context of smallholding integrated aquaculture in Malawi. In R.E. Brummett (ed), Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in sub-Saharan Africa. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Brummett, R.E. 1994c. How can research best serve the needs of aquaculture in Africa? NAGA, the ICLARM Quarterly 17(3): 15-17.
Brummett, R.E. and F.J.K. Chikafumbwa. 1995. Management of rainfed aquaculture on Malawian smallholdings. Paper presented at the Pacific Congress on Marine Science and Technology (PACON) Conference on Sustainable Aquaculture. Honolulu, Hawaii, 11-14 June.
Brummett, R.E. and R.P. Noble. 1995a. Aquaculture for African smallholders. ICLARM Technical Report 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Brummett, R.E. and R.P. Noble. 1995b. Farmer-scientist research partnerships and smallholder integrated aquaculture in Malawi. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Buadaeng, K. and M. van Eckert. 1993. Farmer-centered sustainable farming systems for the highlands of Northern Thailand. Journal of the Asian Farming Systems Association 2(1): 1-13.
Bunting, A.H. 1986. Science and technology for human needs, rural development, and the relief of poverty. In: S. Breth (ed), Five Essays on Science and Farmers in the Developing World. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, Arkansas, USA.
Campbell, D. 1995. The impact of the field day extension approach on the development of fish fanning in selected areas of Western Kenya. TCP/KEN/4551(T) Field Document No. 1. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Kisumu, Kenya.
Castillo, S., T.J. Popma, R.P. Phelps, L.U. Hatch and T.R. Hanson. 1992. Family-scale fish farming in Guatemala: an example of sustainable aquacultural development through national and international collaboration. Research and Development Series 37. International Center for Aquaculture and Aquatic Environments, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Chambers, R. 1986. Understanding professionals: small farmers and scientists. In: S. Breth (ed), Five Essays on Science and Farmers in the Developing World. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, Arkansas, USA.
Chambers, R., Pacey, A. And L-A. Thrupp. 1989. Farmer-first: farmer innovation and agricultural research. Intermediate Technology Publications, London, UK.
Chikafumbwa, F.J.K. 1994. Farmer participation in technology development and transfer in Malawi. In R.E. Brummett (ed), Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in sub-Saharan Africa. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Chimfwembe, C. 1995. Agriculture and aquaculture extension and possible links between these services as experienced in Eastern Province of Zambia. Paper presented at the Aquaculture for Local Communities (ALCOM) Technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Smallholder Fish Farming in Southern Africa. Lilongwe, Malawi, 20-24 November.
Christensen, C. 1994. Agricultural research in Africa: a review of USAID strategies and experience. Technical Paper 3. U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC, USA.
CIMMYT. 1986. Assessing farmers' needs in designing agricultural technology. In: S. Breth (ed), Five Essays on Science and Farmers in the Developing World. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, Arkansas, USA.
Coche, A.G. 1995. Aquaculture research in sub-Saharan Africa: limitations, priorities and plan of action. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Coche, A.G., B.A. Haight and M.M.J. Vincke. 1995. Aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa: synthesis of national reviews and indicative action plan for research. CIFA Technical Paper 23. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.
Cornwall, A. I. Guijt and A. Welbourn. 1994. Acknowledging process: methodological challenges for agricultural research and extension. In: I. Scoones and J. Thompson (eds). Beyond Farmer First: Rural People's Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension Practice. Intermediate Technology Publications, London, UK.
Coulibaly, O.N. and J.H. Sanders. 1995. Potential impacts of improved technologies for sustainable cropping systems in West African semi-arid regions. Paper presented at the USAID Collaborators Workshop on Agricultural Technology Development and Transfer in sub-Saharan Africa, 24-27 January, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Cox, M.L. 1986. A simplified approach to agricultural systems. In: S. Breth (ed), Five Essays on Science and Farmers in the Developing World. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, Arkansas, USA.
Cross, D. 1991. FAO and Aquaculture: ponds and politics and Africa. The Ecologist 21(2):73-76.
Dioné, J. and T. Bedingar. 1995. Food security and technology in West Africa: needs, options and impediments. Paper presented at the USAID Collaborators Workshop on Agricultural Technology Development and Transfer in sub-Saharan Africa, 24-27 January, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Elwell, H.A. 1992. A case for farmer-support research. SPLASH 8(2):7-18.
Fagi, A.M. and S. Suriapermana. 1992. Improving rice-fish in Indonesia. World Aquaculture 23(1):40-42.
Gaillard, J. 1990. Science in the developing world: foreign aid and national policies at a crossroad. Ambio 19(8):348-353.
Githinji, M-w. and C. Perrings. 1993. Social and ecological sustainability in the use of biotic resources in sub-Saharan Africa. Ambio 22(2-3): 110-116.
Goldsworthy, P., F.P. de Vries and J. van Dongen. 1994a. The use of systems methods in international agricultural research centers. ISNAR Briefing Paper 17. International Service for National Agricultural Research, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Goldsworthy, P., F.P. de Vries and J. van Dongen. 1994b. The use of systems methods by NARS for addressing natural resource issues. ISNAR Briefing Paper 16. International Service for National Agricultural Research, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Gomez, A.A. 1994. Research-extension linkage: an important component of technology transfer and adoption. Journal of the Asian Farming Systems Association 2(2): 197-204.
Grover, J.H., D.R. Street and P.D. Starr. 1980. Review of aquaculture development activities in Central and West Africa. Research and Development Series 28. International Center for Aquaculture, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Gupta, M.V. 1992. Low-input technologies for rural aquaculture development in Bangladesh. In: National Research Council, Aquaculture and Schistosomiasis. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, USA.
Gupta, M.V. and M.A. Rab. 1994. Adoption and economics of silver barb (Puntius gonionotus) culture in seasonal waters in Bangladesh. ICLARM Technical Report 41. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
Gupta, M.V., M. Ahmed, M.A.P. Bimbao and C. Lightfoot. 1992. Socioeconomic impact and farmer's assessment of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) culture in Bangladesh. ICLARM Technical Report 35. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
Haight, B.A. 1995 Extension methods for integrated fish farming systems. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Harrison, E. 1994a. Aquaculture in Africa: socio-economic dimensions. In J.F. Muir and R.J. Roberts (eds) Recent Advances in Aquaculture V. Blackwell Science, Oxford, UK.
Harrison, E. 1994b. Digging fishponds: perspectives on motivation. In R.E. Brummett (ed), Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in sub-Saharan Africa. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Harrison, E., J.A. Stewart, R.L. Stirrat and J. Muir. 1994. Fish farming in Africa - what's the catch? Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Scotland and University of Sussex, Brighton, England and Overseas Development Administration, UK.
Hatch, L.U. and T.R. Hanson. 1992. Economic viability of farm diversification through tropical freshwater aquaculture in less developed countries. International Center for Aquaculture, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Hopkins, K.D., 1988. Reporting fishpond yields to farmers. Aquabyte 1(2):6.
Hopkins, K.D. and E.M. Cruz. 1982. The ICLARM-CLSU integrated animal-fish farming project: final report. ICLARM Technical Reports 5. Freshwater Aquaculture Center, Central Luzon State University, Muñoz, Philippines and International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
Huisman, E.A. 1990. Aquacultural research as a tool in international assistance. Ambio 19(8):400-403.
ICLARM. 1993. ICLARM annual report. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
ICLARM-GTZ. 1991. The context of small-scale integrated agriculture-aquaculture systems in Africa: a case study of Malawi. ICLARM Studies and Reviews 18. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
INTERPAKS. 1984. Problems facing national agricultural extension in developing countries. International Programs for Agricultural Knowledge Systems 3. Office of International Agriculture, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA.
Izac, A-M.N. and M.J. Swift. 1994. On agricultural sustainability and its measurement in small-scale farming in sub-Saharan Africa. Ecological Economics 11(2): 105-125.
Kapetsky, J.M. 1995. A first look at the potential contribution of warm water fish farming to food security in Africa. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Kent, G. 1995. Aquaculture and food security. Paper presented at the Pacific Congress on Marine Science and Technology (PACON) Conference on Sustainable Aquaculture. Honolulu, Hawaii, 11-14 June.
Kessler, J.J. and M. Moolhuijzen. 1994. Low external input sustainable agriculture: expectations and realities. Netherlands Journal of Agricultural Science 42(3):181-194.
Lazard, J.Y. 1992. Contribution à une réflection sur des stratégies de recherche et développement en aquaculture du tilapia en Afrique sub-Saharienne. In: G.M. Bernacsek and H. Powles (eds), Aquaculture Systems Research in Africa. International Development Research Center, Ottawa, Canada.
Lazard, J. Y. Lecomte, B. Stomal and J-Y Weigel. 1991. Pisciculture en Afrique sub-Saharienne. Ministère de la Cooperation et du Développement, Paris, France.
Leelapatra, W., N. Tongpan, J. Sollows and G. Chapman. 1992. Participatory research and extension in Thailand. World Aquaculture 23(1):58-60.
Lightfoot, C. and Minnick., D. 1991. Farmer-first qualitative methods: farmers' diagrams for improving methods of experimental design in integrated farming systems. J. Farm. Syst. Res. Ext. 2(1):57-71.
Lightfoot, C. and R. Noble. 1993. A participatory experiment in sustainable agriculture. Journal for Farming Systems Research-Extension 4(1): 11-34.
Lightfoot, C. and R.S.V. Pullin. 1995. An integrated resource management approach to the development of integrated aquaculture farming systems. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Lightfoot, C., S. Feldman and M.Z. Abedin. 1991. Households, agroecosystems and rural resources management. ICLARM Educational Series 12. Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute, Joydebpur and International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
Lightfoot, C., B.A. Costa-Pierce, M.P. Bimbao and C.R. Dela Cruz. 1992. Introduction to rice-fish research and development in Asia. In C.R. Dela Cruz, C. Lightfoot, B.A. Costa-Pierce, V.R. Carangal and M.P. Binbao (eds), Rice-Fish Research and Development in Asia. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 24. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines.
Lightfoot, C., M.A.P. Bimbao, J.P.T. Dalsgaard and R.S.V. Pullin. 1993. Aquaculture and sustainability through integrated resources management. Outlook on Agriculture 22(3): 143-150.
MacKay, K.T. 1992. How to benefit small producers. World Aquaculture 23(1):20-24.
Mandima, J.J. 1995. Socioeconomic factors that influence the adoption of small-scale rural fish farming at household level in Zimbabwe. NAGA, the ICLARM Quarterly 18(2):25-29.
Master, W.A. and J.H. Sanders. 1995 Tools and concepts in impact assessment: research results and future directions. Paper presented at the USAID Collaborators Workshop on Agricultural Technology Development and Transfer in sub-Saharan Africa, 24-27 January, Harare, Zimbabwe.
McCalla, A.F. 1994. Agriculture and food needs to 2025: why we should be concerned. Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, Washington DC, USA.
Molnar, J.J., A. Rubagumya and V. Adjavon. 1991. The sustainability of aquaculture as a farm enterprise in Rwanda. Journal of Applied Aquaculture 1(2):37-62.
Murnyak, D. and G.A. Mafwenga. 1995. Extension methodology practiced in fish farming projects in Tanzania. Paper presented at the Aquaculture for Local Communities (ALCOM) Technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Smallholder Fish Fanning in Southern Africa. Lilongwe, Malawi, 20-24 November.
Mutsekwa, S. 1995. Participatory rural appraisal at the NIJO. ALCOM News 19 (July): 15.
Nathanaël, H. and J. F. Moehl, Jr. 1989. Rwanda national fish culture project. International Center for Aquaculture Research and Development Series No. 34. Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Ngenda, G. 1995. Aquaculture extension methods in Eastern Province, Zambia. Paper presented at the Aquaculture for Local Communities (ALCOM) Technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Smallholder Fish Farming in Southern Africa. Lilongwe, Malawi, 20-24 November.
Nilsson, H. and K. Wetengere. 1994. Adoption and viability criteria for semi-intensive fish farming: a report on a socio-economic study in Ruvuma and Mbeya regions, Tanzania. ALCOM Field Document 28. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.
Noble, R. 1994. Research challenges in integrated resource management (IRM). In: R.E. Brummett (ed), Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in sub-Saharan Africa. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Noble, R.P. and B. Rashidi. 1990. Aquaculture technology transfer to smallholder farmers in Malawi, Southern Africa. NAGA, The ICLARM Quarterly 13(4): 14-16.
Noble, R.P. and B.A. Costa-Pierce. 1992. Aquaculture technology research for smallholder farmers in rural Malawi. In: National Research Council, Aquaculture and Schistosomiasis. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, USA.
Nxumalo, M. 1995. The transfer of appropriate research findings for effective implementation by farmers. Southern African Association for Farming Systems Research-Extension Bulletin 2:21-25.
OECD. 1989. Sustainability in development programmes: a compendium of evaluation experience. Selected Issues in Aid Evaluation 1. Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris, France.
Oram, P., J. Zapata, G. Alibaruho and R. Shyamal. 1979. Investment and input requirements for accelerating food production in low-income countries by 1990. International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
Padilla, V.G. 1993. Farmer-based training and education programs: a key to promoting sustainable farming systems in the Philippines. Journal of the Asian Fanning Systems Association 2(1): 45-57.
Pardey, P., J. Roseboom and N. Beintema. 1995. Agricultural research in Africa: three decades of development. ISNAR Briefing Paper 19. International Service for National Agricultural Research, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Polson, R.A. and D.S.C. Spencer. 1991. The technology adoption process in subsistence agriculture: the case of cassava in southwestern Nigeria. Agricultural Systems 36:65-78.
Popma, T.J., F.E. Ross, B.L. Nerrie and J.R. Bowman. 1984. The development of commercial farming of tilapia in Jamaica 1979-1983. Research and Development Series 31. International Center for Aquaculture, Auburn University, Alabama, USA.
Ranaweera, N., J.M. Dixon and N.S. Jodha. 1993. Sustainability and agricultural development: a farming systems perspective. Journal of the Asian Farming Systems Association 2(1): i-xv.
Reardon, T., V. Kelly, E. Crawford, K. Savadogo and T. Jayne. 1995. Raising farm productivity in Africa to sustain long-term food security. Paper presented at the USAID Collaborators Workshop on Agricultural Technology Development and Transfer in sub-Saharan Africa, 24-27 January, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Reijntjes, C., B. Haverkort and A. Waters-Bayer. 1992. Farming for the future: an introduction to low external input and sustainable agriculture. Macmillan, London, UK.
Rist, S. 1995. Science is not universal. ILEIA Newsletter 11 (2):23.
Ruddle, K. 1993. The impacts of aquaculture development on socioeconomic environments in developing countries: toward a paradigm for assessment. In: R.S.V. Pullin, H. Rosenthal and J.L. Maclean (eds). Environment and Aquaculture in Developing Countries. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 31. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit, Eschborn, Germany.
Scholz, U. and S. Chimatiro. 1995. The promotion of small-scale aquaculture in the Southern Region of Malawi: a reflection of extension approaches and technology packages used by the Malawi-German Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Project (MAGFAD). Paper presented at the Aquaculture for Local Communities (ALCOM) Technical Consultation on Extension Methods for Smallholder Fish Farming in Southern Africa. Lilongwe, Malawi, 20-24 November.
Schreiber, G. and I. Hill. 1993. Promoting community-based natural resource management - a pilot approach under the environmental resource management project in Ghana. Entwicklung und Ländlicher Raum 27(2):6-9.
Schultz, T.W. 1986. The economics of research and agricultural productivity. In: S. Breth (ed). Five Essays on Science and Farmers in the Developing World. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, Arkansas, USA.
Scoones, I. and J. Thompson (eds). 1994. Beyond farmer first: rural people's knowledge, agricultural research and extension practice. Intermediate Technology Publications, London, UK.
Spurling, A., T.Y. Pee, G. Mkamanga and C. Nkwanyana. 1992. Agricultural research in Southern Africa: a framework for action. Africa Technical Department Series 184. The World Bank; Washington, DC, USA.
Stilwell, T. 1995. A report on the 13th annual symposium on systems oriented research in agriculture and rural development - Montpellier, France. Southern Africa Association for Farming Systems Research-Extension (SAAFSR-E) Newsletter 8:1-6.
Stolzenbach, A. 1994. Learning by improvisation: farmer experimentation in Mali. In: I. Scoones and J. Thompson (eds). Beyond Farmer First: Rural People's Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension Practice. Intermediate Technology Publications, London, UK.
van den Berg, F. 1994. Privatization of fingerling production and extension: a new approach for aquaculture development in Madagascar. In R.E. Brummett (ed), Aquaculture Policy Options for Integrated Resource Management in sub-SAhAran Africa. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 46. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
van der Mheen, H. 1996. Report of the technical consultation on extension methods for smallholder fish farming in Southern Africa, Lilongwe, Malawi, 20-24 November 1995. ALCOM Report No. 21, FAO, Harare.
van der Mheen-Sluijer, J. 1995. Aquaculture extension guidelines for small scale farmers: based on experiences from a pilot project in Eastern Province, Zambia. ALCOM Report No. 16, FAO, Harare.
van Duivenbooden, N. 1995. Integrating stakeholder's goals, research disciplines and levels of scale. ILEIA Newsletter 11 (2): 16-18.
Vel, J. 1995. Indigenous economics: a different rationale. ILEIA Newsletter 11(2):21-22.
Vincke, M.M.J. 1995. The present state of development in continental aquaculture in Africa. In: J-J. Symoens and J-C. Micha (eds). The management of integrated freshwater agro-piscicultural ecosystems in tropical areas. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands and Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
Weeks, P. 1990. Aquaculture development: an anthropological perspective. World Aquaculture 21(3):69-74.
Wijkstrom, U. 1991. How fish culture can stimulate economic growth: conclusions from fish farmer surveys in Zambia. ALCOM (GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP/9). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Wijkstrom, U.N. 1992. Notes for a technical seminar on aquaculture and economic growth. ALCOM (GCP/INT/555/SWE) Field Document No. 19. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Wijkstrom, U.N. and H. Aase. 1989. Fish farmers in rural communities: results of a socio-economic pilot survey in Northern Province of Zambia. ALCOM (GCP/INT/436/SWE.5). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Lusaka, Zambia.
Williams, M.J. 1995 A more profitable crop? Aquaculture and food security. Paper presented at the Pacific Congress on Marine Science and Technology (PACON) Conference on Sustainable Aquaculture. Honolulu, Hawaii, 11-14 June.
World Bank, UNDP, CEC and FAO. 1992. A study of international fisheries research. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA.
<section>c</section>
Appendix 6: Abstracts of Information Papers
Rapid rural appraisal, participatory rural appraisal and aquaculture
by Philip Townsley
The paper distinguishes between rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal (PRA).
RRA is an activity carried out by a group of people from different professional disciplines which usually aims to learn about a particular topic, area, group of people, or whatever else is of concern to those organizing the RRA. It uses a set of guidelines and tools to involve local people in the collection of information, organizing it so that it is easily understood by a wide range of people, and quickly analyzing and reporting findings and suggesting appropriate action. RRA is responsive and flexible, achieves an understanding of processes and dynamics, and because analysis is carried out during the appraisal, provides its own opportunities for cross checking. RRA has been criticized for providing findings which are not statistically sound.
PRA is distinguished from RRA in a number of respects. Ideally, it responds to the needs of communities and target groups rather than those of development workers and agencies. Thus RRA is more 'extractive' than PRA; the tools are used to help outsiders learn rather than to help local people analyze their own conditions and communicate with outsiders. Relatedly, the focus of PRA should be decided by the communities and the end product used by them, rather than outsiders. While is possible to use RRA purely for research, PRA is closely linked to action or intervention.
Advantages of PRA include that it may provide a means of identification of genuine priorities, that assist mobilization of community resources, leading eventually to more sustainable development activities. There are however dangers in raising expectations which cannot be realized, of proposing development plans to which agencies are incapable of responding, and of failing to take account of stratification within communities.
The relative appropriateness of RRA and PRA for the planning process in aquaculture depend on the type of planning framework in place. Within a sectoral planning framework, there is greater scope for the use of various forms of RRA. Within a more integrated planning framework, the use of RRA continues, but there is also scope for the use of PRA in certain contexts. For example, PRA might be used for participatory planning for resource conflict resolution. In a participatory planning framework, PRAs would form an integral part of any needs analysis or resource management activities.
Rural aquaculture: overview and framework for country reviews
by Peter Edwards
This introductory volume to a planned series of national reviews on the role of aquaculture in rural development comprises two parts: a global overview of rural aquaculture; and guidelines for individual country reviews. Although aquaculture originated over two millennia ago, it remains a relatively minor agricultural activity globally in comparison to agronomy and animal husbandry. Considerable promotion is required for aquaculture to fulfill its potential to provide significantly increased food, employment and income for the rapidly growing populations of underdeveloped countries. The term "rural aquaculture" reflects the target group of this series of reviews; impoverished small-scale farming households.
A systems approach is a prerequisite for effective promotion of rural aquaculture. Particular use is made of conceptual frameworks to facilitate understanding of myriad interrelated factors involved in socially and environmentally sustainable aquaculture production systems; to outline the means to assess the potential of aquaculture to contribute to rural development; and to outline the means to promote aquaculture for the target group where and when appropriate.
The case is made that the major constraints facing the promotion of aquaculture are not technical. They are the limited ability of developing countries to assimilate and adapt existing technology and limited local capacity in education, research and development. Contrary to popular belief, this applies to most countries of Asia as well as to Africa and Latin America. A more balanced approach to research would accelerate introduction of existing technologies methodologies for adaptation to various developing countries through situation appraisal, adaptive field research, and extension research. These need to be conducted in parallel with upgrading the educational and research and capacity of developing countries. Co-ordination of donor assistance from external agencies would greatly facilitate the process.
Socio-economics of African aquaculture from an Asian point of view
by P. Kumar
The paper looks at the similarities and differences between African and Asian aquaculture. It stresses that the similarities between Africa and Asia are much greater then the differences.
The paper focuses on pond size and management, especially input levels and at motivations for pond construction. It argues that ion Africa the pond size and management is especially closely related to the amount of on farm inputs available. The limited amount of these inputs therefore does not always justify an increase in pond size. In Africa, ponds are often constructed for reasons of status. The paper goes on to consider the implications for extension, arguing that there are good reasons for increasing aquaculture extension to a wide area.
Institutional delivery system for small scale aquaculture development
by K. Ch. Chong
The paper focuses on aquaculture development in Asia. It describes the role of small scale aquaculture in the region, particularly in relation to the development of shrimp culture and discusses the differences between different scales of aquaculture development. Some aquaculture industries can correctly be described as 'infant industries'. However, aspects of aquaculture production, particularly related to shrimps are now mature and based on highly developed technology.
The paper then goes on to outline socio-economic considerations such as the labour absorption capacity of aquaculture, and the role of aquaculture within rural households. It is argued that the labour absorption capacity of aquaculture is in fact limited. A number of problems of institutional support are identified. The principal focus is on problems within the government support services, mainly related to allocation of resources. Seed provision by governments has been beset with problems of both organization and budgetary allocation. It is recommended that as far as possible, support to the private sector should replace such functions.
Use of macro-economic information in policy formulation and planning for government support to small scale rural aquaculture
by Pierre Justin Kouka
While agricultural economists have extensively studied macro-economic problems related to agriculture in general, very little attention has been focused on the economics of aquaculture, especially macro-economic aspects of aquaculture production. Because of increased demand generated from increased population and consumer awareness of fish nutritional values, stock replacement and availability of wild-caught fish become questionable. As natural waters are being over-fished, the need for aquaculture development is conspicuous.
Aquaculture has been identified as one of the few profitable and expanding sectors of the agricultural sector, especially in developed countries where the industry's contribution to the agricultural economy is steadily increasing. Although it is predicted that aquaculture growth will be sustained over a long period of time, many challenges still need to be faced. Increased public awareness of the effects of aquaculture on the economy and the environment has brought aquaculture to the attention of policy makers. This has generated greater interest in data collection and information processing for a more holistic approach in aquaculture planning.
Aquaculture planning is hampered by inadequate and/or limited information about the existing conditions for aquaculture and fisheries. In many instances, the character and quality of data may vary spatially and temporally. This deficiency leads to a lack of economic estimation for the purpose of providing the short and long-term effects of rural aquaculture development.
The feasibility of aquaculture development depends on economic and social characteristics such as market conditions, availability of natural resources, and social attitudes. Thus, several conditions must be met in order to facilitate the successful implementation of an aquacultural project. These include but are not limited to: (1) favourable market for intended species; (2) positive attitude regarding aquaculture and the willingness of people to accept changes; (3) equitable access to natural resources such as land and water; (4) availability of inputs, equipment, materials, and services needed for aquaculture; and convincing indicators showing benefits to prospective fish farmers.
Although there is no prescribed remedy for policies in rural aquaculture development, it is evident that a well designed plan will provide an excellent tool for the formulation of aquaculture programs.
<section>d</section>
Appendix 7: Agenda
TUESDAY, 28 May
Opening
- Words by the Chief of the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service, Robin Welcomme (FIRI)
- Words by the Expert Consultation Coordinator, Manuel Martinez-Espinosa (FIRI), giving general information and briefing on the mechanism for the running of the meeting
Adoption of Agenda
Presentation of overview paper "Options for Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture Development" by Elizabeth Harrison
THEME 1. OBJECTIVES AND INDICATORS
- Presentation of background paper summary by the Session Leader Richard Pretto
- Presentation of the information paper summary on "Rapid Rural Appraisal, Participatory Rural Appraisal and Aquaculture", by Philip Townsley
- Discussion
WEDNESDAY, 29 May
THEME 2. PLACE OF AQUACULTURE IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
- Presentation of background paper summary by the Session Leader Sevaly Sen
- Presentation of the information paper summary on "Rural Aquaculture Framework for Country Reviews", by Peter Edwards
- Presentation of the information paper summary on "Socio-Economics of African Aquaculture from an Asian Point of View", by Ulf Wijkstrom.
- Discussion
THURSDAY, 30 May
THEME 3. INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT
- Presentation of background paper summary by the Session Leader (Sunil Siriwardena)
- Presentation of the information paper summary on "Use of Macro-Economic Information in Policy Formulation and Planning for Government Support to Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture" by Pierre Justin Kouka
- Discussion
THEME 4. RESEARCH-DEVELOPMENT LINKAGES
- Presentation of background paper summary by the Session Leader Randy Brummett
- Discussion
FRIDAY, 31 May
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION SESSION
- Summary presentation of the outcomes of the discussion sessions by the Session Leader Elizabeth Harrison
- Discussion
Closing of Consultation
<section>e</section>
Appendix 8: List of Participants
NON-FAO
Arne Andreasson
SWEDMAR
P.O. Box 423
S-401 26 Goteborg
Sweden
Tel.: +46-31-630 300
Fax: +46-31-154 113
E-mail: SWEDMAR@FISKERIVERKET.SE
Randall Brumett
Project Director
ICLARM/GTZ Africa Aquaculture Project
P.O. Box 229
Zomba
Malawi
Tel.: +265-53 12 74
Fax: +265-52 27 33
E-mail: RBRUMMETT@UNIMA.WN.APC.ORG
Sloans Chimatiro
Fanning System Research/Extension Officer
National Aquaculture Centre
Malawi Fisheries Department
P.O. Box 206
Zomba
Malawi
Tel.: +265-531274
Fax: +265-522397
E-mail: SCHIMATIRO@UNIMA.WN.APC.ORG
André Coche
FAO-FIRI (Retired)
Viale degli Astri, 59 (Z46C/A15)
Rome 00144
Italy
Tel.: +39-6-5295977
Peter Edwards
Professor of Aquaculture
School of Environment, Resources and Development
Asian Institute of Technology (AIT)
P.O. Box 2754
Bangkok
Thailand
Tel.: +66-2-524 5477, 516 0110-44
Fax: +66-2-524 6200, 516 2126, 516 1418
E-mail: PEDWARDS@AIT.AC.TH
Elizabeth Harrison (Ms.)
University of Sussex
School of Asian and African Studies
Falmer
Brighton BN1 9QN
UK
Tel.: +44-1273-606 753 x 2276
Fax: +44-1273-623 572
E-mail: E.A.HARRISON@SUSSEX.AC.UK
Francis Henderson
FAO-FIRI (Retired)
Via Tespi, 46 (May-November)
Rome 00125
Italy
Tel.: +39-6-5235 8808
or
1914 SE 37th Terrace, Cape Coral
Florida 33904
USA
Tel.: +1-941-540 2711
E-mail: 73442.1333@COMPUSERVE.COM
Pierre Justin Kouka
Research Associate
Aquaculture/Fisheries Center
Box 4912
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
Pine Bluff
Arkansas 71601
USA
Fax: +1-501-543 8033/8129
Tel.: +1-501-543 8532/8537
E-mail: KOUKA_P@VX4500.UAPB.EDU
Richard Pretto
Director
Dirección de Desarrollo Rural
Ministerio de Desarrollo Agropecuario
Santiago de Veraguas
Panamá
Tel.: +507-99 84 771
Fax: +507-99 83 761
Sevaly Sen (Ms.)
Institute for Fisheries Management and Coastal Community Development
3 Stella Road
Tooting
London SW17 9HG
UK
Tel.: +44-181-672 6650
Fax: +44-181-767904
E-mail: 100561.1307@COMPUSERVE.COM
Sunil Siriwardena
Senior Research Officer
National Aquatic Resources Agency (NARA)
Crow Island
Colombo 15
Sri Lanka
Fax: +94-522932, 522881
E-mail: SUNIL@NARA.AC.LK
Philip Townsley
Free Lance
Via Annio 12, Int. 2
01100 Viterbo
Italy
Tel.: +39-(0)761-346066
E-mail: PTOWNSLEY@PELAGUS.IT
Nzamujo Godfrey Ugwegbulam
Director
Shongai Environmental Rehabilitation Centre
B.P. 597
Porto Novo
Benin
Tel.: +229-22 50 92
Fax: +229-22 20 50
Frans van den Berg
Aquaculture Consultant
Via Ernesto Basile 21
00128 Rome
Italy
Tel./Fax: +39-6-507 2948
FAO FIELD STAFF
Henk van der Mheen
FAO
Aquaculture for Local Community
Development Programme (ALCOM)
P.O. Box 3730
Harare
Zimbabwe
Tel.: +263-4-724 985
Fax: +263-4-792 782
FAO HQ STAFF
Bo Applegren
Senior Officer
Water Resources, Development and Management Service (AGLW)
Land and Water Development Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 4530
Fax: +39-6-5225 6275
E-mail: Bo.Applegren@fao.org
Devin Bartley
Fishery Resources Officer (Genetic Conservation)
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 4376
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Devin.Bartley@fao.org
René Branckaert
Animal Production Officer
Animal Production Service (AGAP)
Animal Production and Health Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 4105
Fax: +39-6-5225 5749
E-mail: Rene.Branckaert@fao.org
Abdallah Gaaya
Agricultural Training and Extension Officer
Extension, Education and Communication Service (SDRE)
Research, Extension and Training Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 3340
Fax: +39-6-52255731
E-mail: Abdallah.Gaaya@fao.org
Boyd Haight
Chief
Management Support Unit (FIDX)
Fisheries Department
Tel.: +39-6-5225 5324
Fax: +39-6-5225 3605
E-mail: Boyd.Haight@fao.org
Matthias Halwart
Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 5080
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Matthias.Halwart@fao.org
Jacques Jallade
Agricultural Training and Extension Officer
Extension, Education and Communication Service (SDRE)
Research, Extension and Training Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 3440
Fax: +39-6-52255731
E-mail: Jacques.Jallade@fao.org
Manuel Martinez-Espinosa
Fishery Resources Officer (Rural Aquaculture)
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 3470
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Manuel.Martinez@fao.org
Mario Pedini
Senior Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 6279
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Mario.Pedini@fao.org
Angelika Schuckler (Ms.)
Farm Management Economist
Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP)
Agricultural Support Systems Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 3004
Fax: +39-6-5225 6850
E-mail: Angelika.Schuckler@fao.org
Ziad Shehadeh
Senior Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 4795
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Ziad.Shehadeh@fao.org
Albert Tacon
Fishery Resources Officer (Feed Specialist)
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 6470
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Albert.Tacon@fao.org
Robin Welcomme
Chief
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
Fishery Resources Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 5007
Fax: +39-6-5225 3020
E-mail: Robin.Welcomme@fao.org
Ulf Wijkstrom
Chief
Development Planning Service (FIPP)
Fishery Policy and Planning Division
Tel.: +39-6-5225 3156
Fax: +39-6-5225 6500
E-mail: Ulf.Wijkstrom@fao.org
