Gender Database for Agriculture and Resource Management Policies in Pacific Island Countries.
RAP Publication: 1999/7.
By Heather Booth Demography Programme Research School of Social Sciences Australian National University, Canberra FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand ISBN: 974-86644-2-2.
Editorial support: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer Ms. Marlynne E. Hopper, Consultant For copies write to: Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
The designations and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
2.3.1 Agriculture 2.3.2 Fisheries 2.3.3 Forestry 2.3.4 Natural Resource Management 2.3.5 Rural Development.
The Impact of Policies on Household Livelihood and Food Security 3.1 Fiji 3.2 Vanuatu 3.3 Samoa.
Gender-Disaggregated Data Needs to Address Policy 4.1 Data Availability and Unavailability.
Capacity Building in Gender-Disaggregated Database Development Bibliography Annex 1: Statistical Sources and Planned Activities Annex 2: Persons Consulted.
Women in development activities in the Pacific Region should be built on solid foundations of good data and area specific information on gender roles in local production. Policies and programmes in such sectors as agriculture, ecological resource management and rural production should reflect the realities of country specific gender roles in these sectors. Though in recent years the development agenda has addressed gender concerns, we still have not achieved the goals set by various UN conferences on women since 1985. In Pacific Island countries, a major barrier to full integration is a lack of current information on the status of women in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprises. FAO, as the lead technical organization in the UN system, has a special interest in developing appropriate databases on women's participation in agriculture and associated sectors that determine household food security. In reflection of such commitment, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific has produced this document on "Gender Database Development for Agriculture and Resource Management Policies in Pacific Island Countries." The document presents an overview of the policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprise development, and examines the current status of gender integration in these policies. The focus of the analysis is on the current integration and potential for these policies with gender considerations to achieve sustained household food security in the selected Pacific Island countries. Drawing from such a review, the document provides detailed guidelines on data requirements relating to gender dimensions in agriculture, natural resource management and rural development in Pacific Island countries. We hope this document will be of value to the Ministries and other interested groups who aim to improve the integration of women in development and country specific genderdisaggregated databases among Pacific Region countries.
Prem Nath Assistant Director General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand January 1999.
Acknowledgements.
This document is an outcome of various missions undertaken by Heather Booth, a demographer and social statistician with extensive experience in the Pacific Island region. The report was prepared under a consultancy agreement with the Women in Development Programme of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific. Visits were made in April-May 1997 to the three Pacific Island countries covered in the report, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, in order to collect information and interview key people. A list of the individuals consulted appears as part of the report. Each one of them is gratefully acknowledged for their assistance which enabled FAO/RAP to prepare this report. Dr. Vili A. Fuavao, FAO Sub-Regional Representative for the Pacific Islands, is sincerely thanked for his support to this mission. The report provides an analysis of the current status of gender and women's concerns in policies concerning natural resource management, agriculture and rural enterprise development in relation to food security. It also addresses data needs in order to address the gender aspects of these policies. Although the report is developed based on field visits to three island countries in the Pacific Region, we hope that the database framework that forms part of the document will provide guidelines for gender sensitive database development for other island countries in the region. Women in Development Service Sustainable Development Department Group (RAPS) FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand January 1999.
Women in Pacific Island countries play an important role in agricultural and natural resource management and in contributing to food and livelihood security. Yet, programmes and policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprises do not always take women's roles sufficiently into account given the scarcity of relevant gender-differentiated and sex-segregated information. In order to better address food security issues, it is therefore necessary to understand the status of women as compared to men and to strengthen women's roles in agriculture and natural resource management. This requires the availability of relevant information. This report examines existing policies in the areas of agriculture, natural resource management, fisheries, forestry and rural enterprises in three Pacific Island countries, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa. The focus is on their relevance to women and their impact on food and livelihood security as a means to analyse the current status of gender integration in these policies. On the basis of this review and analysis of existing policies, the report identifies relevant sex-disaggregated data needs at both the national and community level, as well as appropriate sources and data availability. Strategies for capacity building in the identification, collection and tabulation of sex-disaggregated data are subsequently discussed as a means of enhancing database development in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. While acknowledging the importance and complementarity of qualitative data, such as detailed studies of gender roles or gender sensitive case studies of farming systems, the focus of the report is on the quantitative data required to understand the roles of women in agriculture, rural development and food security. Sex-disaggregated data are a crucial prerequisite to the formulation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and.
programmes aimed at enhancing the role of women in agriculture, natural resource management and rural development. However statistical data of this nature are not readily available in Pacific Island countries. In this context, the report identifies data needs as well as appropriate data sources for the three countries in the study. Data needs are grouped into seven broad areas: i) economic activities; ii) access to means of production; iii) time use and productivity; iv) decision making; v) income and expenditure; vi) food security; and vii) education and training. Within each area, a range of data requirements at the community and/or national level are defined, data availability or unavailability is discussed, and sources or proposed sources are identified. The report is cognisant of the importance of database development as a means to strengthen policy formulation and planning in the areas of agriculture, natural resource management, forestry, fisheries and rural enterprise development. It discusses how database development involves defining data needs, collecting and tabulating required data and organizing data such that they are available to users. In addition, it recognises the need to foster effective communication channels between data users and data producers. On the basis of the analysis of existing policies related to agriculture and natural resource management in Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, the report reiterates the absolute necessity of according full attention to gender-disaggregated and sexsegregated information in database development. In this context, four strategies for capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development are identified and discussed. Firstly, the need to increase gender awareness among both users and producers of databases in order to enhance recognition and definition of data needs, and to improve communications between them. The second strategy recommends capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development for users in order to increase their statistical awareness given the tendency for users concerned with women in development issues to be unfamiliar with data collection. The third strategy.
focuses on the need to increase skills in farming systems database development, not currently well developed in the Pacific Region, given their appropriateness for gathering community level information. For instance, in many cases much of the data required at the community level could be best obtained through research and extension activities carried out within communities. Finally, the fourth strategy advocates the need to enhance skills in computer-based data compilation, through training in database management and software use, given the great benefits and potential of electronic technologies for database development. The report illustrates the value and potential of genderdisaggregated database development as a tool for the effective formulation and monitoring of agriculture and natural resource policies. Although the focus of this report is on three Pacific Island countries, Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, it nevertheless provides a guide to strengthen database development in other countries in the region.
Abbreviations.
ADB AusAID DP3 EEZ FAO GATT GDP ILO Asian Development Bank Australian Agency for International Development Third National Development Plan (1992-1996), Vanuatu Exclusive Economic Zone Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs Gross Domestic Product International Labour Organization.
ISCO-88 International Standard Classification of Occupations 1988 ISIC International Standard Industrial Classification MAFFM Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery and Meteorology, Samoa MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests, Fiji MWA NA NGO RAP SPC Ministry for Women's Affairs, Samoa Not available Non-governmental Organization FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific South Pacific Commission.
SPREP UNDP UNFPA UNICEF UNIFEM.
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme United Nations Development Programme United Nations Population Fund United Nations International Childrens Fund United Nations Development Fund for Women.
VRDTCA Vanuatu Rural Development and Training Centres' Association.
Introduction.
Pacific Island economies are based primarily on agriculture and related activities. For many years, the traditional subsistence economy has coexisted with cash cropping of coconut and introduced crops. This ensured a continuation of self-sufficiency in food and traditional materials whilst at the same time providing cash for essential expenses. Until relatively recently, the agricultural sector received considerable public support and protectionist policies served to ensure food security. The globalisation of world trade and, in particular, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) are however producing significant changes in world commodity markets with repercussions for agriculture in the Pacific. Under the Agreement on Agriculture of the Uruguay Round, policies must have minimal distortionary effects on trade or production. Pacific Island economies have had to adapt to this new environment. The response has generally been a greater emphasis on the expansion of the private sector with exports as the key to economic growth. Under this new approach to economic development, food production and food security are in danger of receiving less attention than they deserve. Since women contribute considerably to food production, especially in Melanesia, women's roles are in similar danger. This only adds to the low status that women in general and women's role in agriculture already suffer. The issue of women's role in agriculture (and concomitant role in natural resource management) is thus closely linked to the issue of food security. Indeed, to some extent, it has been possible to de-emphasise the importance of food production and food security simply because these are women's concerns. In order to address food security issues therefore, it is necessary to address and strengthen women's role in agriculture and.
natural resource management. This requires the availability of information. In this context, this report seeks to make relevant data available for three Pacific Island countries, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa1. An important part of the report focuses on data requirements to inform and strengthen policy and programme planning in agriculture and natural resource management with respect to women's roles in food production and food security. Additionally, the report includes a discussion of data needs to address policy in rural enterprise development given its close links to agriculture. The improved availability of sex-disaggregated data on human resources in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development will also permit monitoring of the changes in women's and men's roles which will undoubtedly come about as a result of the policies being put in place. A first requirement for determining data needs to address policy is to examine that policy. The report therefore examines current policies, including strategies and plans of action, in the areas of agriculture (including fishing and forestry) and natural resource management as well as rural enterprise development. The focus is on those areas that are relevant to women and on the impact of policies on food security and livelihood concerns. The report then identifies relevant sex-disaggregated data needs at the national and community level, as well as appropriate sources and data availability. Strategies for capacity building in the identification, collection and tabulation of sex-disaggregated data are then discussed as a means to enhance database development in human resources with regard to agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. This report forms part of activities carried out under the global FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development 1996-2001. The purposes of this plan are threefold. Firstly, to ensure an evolving and dynamic understanding of the situation of rural women including their contributions to, and constraints in, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and rural development. Secondly, to establish strategies and instruments with reachable targets to address.
gender concerns in technical areas. Thirdly, to thereby enhance the benefits that rural women derive from their contributions to sustainable agriculture, forestry, fisheries and rural development, as well as strengthen their capacities to contribute to national development in each of these sectors.
1 Visits were made to these countries in April-May 1997.
Policies Relating to Agriculture, Fisheries, Forestry, Natural Resource Management and Rural Enterprise Development.
This section discusses current policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. In order to place these policies in context, some brief background information is also presented.
Policies relating to economic and social development in Fiji were formulated in the early 1990s (Government of the Republic of Fiji, 1993) and remain current after review in 1995 (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). The overall aims are accelerated economic growth through private sector initiatives with an emphasis on exports. The private sector, operating in the open market, is recognised as providing the essential driving force of the economy, employment, rising real incomes and revenue. Women have been entering the labour force in increasing numbers in line with the rapid expansion of the manufacturing sector, in particular, the garment export industry. In addition, an increasing number of women are self-employed in incomegenerating activities such as farming, market-gardening, fishing and reef-gleaning, craft production, retail outlets and food vending. Many of these women are self-made, having received no capital or training assistance. Policies are intended to involve women as equal partners in development, to train women to improve their employment opportunities, to strengthen information on gender and co-ordination of activities, and to examine legislation with respect to gender (Government of Fiji, 1993). Gender issues in agriculture have recently been addressed by the UNIFEM/AusAID/UNDP Mainstreaming.
Project2. Gender sensitisation training has been carried out and gender is now incorporated into mainstream policies and activities.
2.1.1 Agriculture.
In the early 1990s in Fiji, agriculture contributed about a fifth of GDP and almost half of total employment (women's informal sector employment is under reported). Sugar is the major agricultural export crop, accounting for some 40 percent of total exports in the early 1990s and employing almost exclusively men. Copra is also important. More recently introduced crops have included ginger, cocoa and rice. Dalo, duruka and yaqona are also exported. Beef, dairy, poultry and pork production meet most of the needs of the local market. The 1993 Policy3 (Government of Fiji, 1993) aimed to guide the agricultural sector towards a more competitive and market oriented approach to production, and to use this approach in adapting to market changes. Such market changes include: deregulation; export promotion; improved productivity and cost effectiveness; private sector investment; reorientation towards financial performance and price effectiveness; and quality and privatisation. The Government continues to provide essential support services, such as extension, research, marketing, planning, regulatory and infrastructure development, and to enforce measures for sustainability. Under the current refocusing, this policy continues to pursue a corporate thrust, promoting increased co-operation with the private sector and export growth. A Corporate Plan (1997-2000) has been submitted to the Government for approval. Export-led policy aims to provide income-generating opportunities and, at the same time, improve food accessibility and affordability through consistency and quality of supply. It promotes traditional crops and seeks to identify niche markets (in USA, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and Japan) for crops such as fresh mango, pawpaw, taro and traditional vegetables. The European market is an important market for processed fruit puree. The emphasis on.
an expanded export market is expected to generate a surplus for the domestic market. The surplus for the domestic market is intended to absorb lower quality produce and provide economic viability. Most of the produce exported is grown by smallholders with 1-10 acres of land. There is a mix of smallholdings and larger mechanised farms, always with mixed cropping. Constraints to agricultural development include: inadequate extension services; land tenure; water resources; insufficient appropriate technologies; irregularity of supply; undeveloped local and export markets; and a lack of many of the facilities essential for efficient production including infrastructure, capital, cold-storage and freezing capacity (for marine produce), fuel supplies for fishing boats, marketing facilities, quality control, and adequate air freight capacity (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995).
2.1.2 Fisheries.
Although the fisheries sector contributes only 1.6 percent of GDP, it has important potential. Subsistence fisheries are important in themselves and as a source of income. Beche-demer are processed and dried. Trochus shells are collected for the pearl button industry. Women are involved in subsistence fisheries related to gathering from the reef. Women are also successfully involved in freshwater mussel fisheries. A fish cannery employs rural women. The 1993 Policy aims to: expand tuna and deep-sea fisheries; improve efficiency and quality in small-scale commercial fisheries; assist rural fishermen in the transition from subsistence to small-scale commercial fishing; develop aquaculture (e.g. giant clam, seaweed, prawn and crab); improve quality and added value of exports; regulate for optimum utilisation and sustainability; and improve business management and fish handling and processing. At present, however, there is no strategy for inshore fisheries and no assessment of stock levels.
2.1.3 Forestry.
The forestry sector contributed 1.9 percent of GDP in 1994 (AusAID, 1995). Forestry provides rural income through plantation ownership and timber processing. Forest exports are an important component of total exports. Women are involved in community forestry. In response to a request from women, the Forestry Department began to promote the identification and awareness of traditional medicinal plants. A non-governmental organization (NGO), Wainimate, also promotes traditional medicinal plants. The 1993 Policy aims to: encourage private sector involvement; ensure landowner participation; strengthen training; prepare a forest inventory; promote the 1990 logging code; promote conservation, protection, rehabilitation and reserves; and encourage forest development so as to generate employment and export income.
2.1.4 Natural Resource Management.
The 1993 Policy seeks to ensure sustainable development through protection of the environment against activities that threaten long-term productive potential. This includes sustainable use of renewable resources, integrating environmental management in planning and development, strengthening institutional capacity for sound environmental management, environmental impact studies for new projects, and prioritising environmental expenditure according to its contribution to socioeconomic development. Conservation and protection measures are to include community education. In addition, the active participation of rural people is to be encouraged in precautionary environment conservation and management measures.
2.1.5 Rural Development.
Some two-thirds of Fiji's population is rural (Government of Fiji, 1986 Census). In line with national development policies, the private sector is seen as the key to rural development through employment creation and the retention of young people in rural areas. The main areas identified for development are agriculture.
(including timber) and tourism. Policies and strategies for rural development are intended to: improve the effectiveness of local administration; promote private investment; provide supporting infrastructure for private commercial development; maintain effective social services, particularly health, education and basic need services; develop appropriate transport systems; and encourage people's participation, particularly through NGOs (Government of Fiji, 1993). The 1995 review of policy (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995) further emphasised small-scale agriculture and tourism as the key strategic sectors for development. While tourism is an important component of development, the rural population has not benefited as much as possible as a result of inadequately developed linkages to the rural economy. Proposed initiatives thus aim to strengthen these linkages through the development of handicrafts, ecotourism and smallscale agriculture. Women's role in handicraft production has been recognised in the proposed initiative to develop programmes for women's clubs to produce craft work for sale in tourist outlets (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). Other constraints to the development of tourism include: a lack of Government commitment, and a consequent lack of funding; insufficient training facilities; inadequate hotel room and airline capacity; high costs; and land tenure (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). Human resource constraints also exist in that the market economy cuts across traditional indigenous modes of production. Training in business is therefore seen as an essential part of the development of the rural private sector. Since the majority of the rural population is of Fijian ethnicity, this training has concentrated on the enhancement of indigenous Fijians' participation in business. The recent review of policy in this area (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995) identified three levels for business development: i) corporate; ii) smallmedium enterprise; and iii) income generation. At the smallmedium enterprise level, the review noted that progress had been extremely slow. However, most Fijians are involved at the.
income generation level. The review also noted that the policy of deregulation runs contrary to the enhancement of indigenous Fijians' participation in business since their infant businesses cannot compete with well established larger businesses. Support through advisory and training services is therefore required, and various protectionist measures and tax incentives have also been proposed (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995).
2.2 Vanuatu.
In Vanuatu, agriculture, forestry and fisheries accounted for 23 percent of GDP in 1995, with 10 percent coming from subsistence agriculture and 13 percent from commercial farms and plantations (FAO, 1997). Agriculture, forestry and fisheries accounted for 65 percent of exports in 1995 (ibid.). Livestock production makes a significant contribution to GDP and beef production is well established with exports to Japan and other Pacific Island countries. Despite vast reserves, fisheries production is small. Forestry accounted for some 4 percent of GDP in 1995, this being reduced from early 1990 levels due to concerns about conservation (ibid.). The population of Vanuatu is overwhelmingly rural; 82 percent of the population was classified as rural by the 1989 census (SPC/UNDP, 1991). Rural households are characterised by a semi-subsistence lifestyle. Traditionally women have been responsible for food cropping and marketing while men are involved mainly in cash crop production. Men also assist with the heavier land-clearing work for food production. On average, women spend 18 percent of their time on food production and marketing and a further 5 percent of their time on cash cropping (Agricultural Census, 1983-84 quoted in UNICEF/Government of Vanuatu, 1991). Yet very little agricultural extension assistance is available for women. Until very recently, development policy in Vanuatu was formulated in five-yearly development plans, the most recent of which is the Third National Development Plan 1992-1996 (Vanuatu National Planning and Statistics Office, 1992). A.
shorter planning timeframe of three years has now been adopted, and policies for 1997-1999 are currently being incorporated into a Comprehensive Reform Programme with the assistance of the Asian Development Bank. Traditionally women's involvement in planning and decision making has been minimal. Even today, many national and community issues are still addressed only by men. These include issues such as land use and community water supplies which are of vital concern to women given their role in agriculture and food production. The overall development goal for women is the realisation of their full potential as equal partners and beneficiaries in development processes and the promotion of their full and equal participation in local, national and international affairs. Relevant areas of emphasis include: incorporation of women's issues in mainstream development; recognition of the importance of the empowerment of women as a cornerstone to sustainable development; and recognition of the strategic role of women as agents and beneficiaries of development and in the alleviation of poverty (Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995).
2.2.1 Agriculture.
Smallholder producers in Vanuatu accounted for approximately 80 percent of agricultural production in 1994 (Government of Vanuatu, 1994). The main subsistence crops grown are sweet potato, yams, taro, bananas and manioc. The main cash crops are copra and cocoa, together with coffee, kava, pumpkin, pepper, vanilla, groundnut and potato. Emphasis in the past on cash crops, coupled with a lack of foresight, has resulted in a shortage of traditional materials. At the same time, growth in the tourism industry has increased demand for traditional materials including palms for thatched roofing, pandanus for handicrafts, bananas and pawpaw. Yet none of these are planted in sufficient quantities. Although sandalwood was sold for a high price in previous decades, it has.
not been replanted. Similarly, kava consumption has outstripped supply. Given the potential for traditional crop development, smallholders are now being advised to increase planting of all such crops. Vanuatu is unable to export surplus agricultural production due to a lack of proper quarantine legislation (a Bill seeking to address this issue is currently before Parliament). The country has the potential, at both the national and household level, to produce significantly more than current production levels. In general, however, households have fixed cash needs which they meet but do not go beyond. Potential therefore exists to expand household agricultural production as a means to increase household food security and generate increased incomes. The two key objectives under the Third National Development Plan 1992-1996 (DP3) are to: i) expand the agricultural and natural resources sector in a sustainable manner as an economic sector providing, at the national level, domestic employment, income generating opportunities, domestic food security and export revenue; and ii) concentrate and prioritise the provision of sustainable and appropriate assistance to smallholder farmers and fisherfolk. The specific policy objectives of DP3 in relation to agricultural production and national food security include the development of subsistence farming and gardening, with a special emphasis on enhancing women's agricultural activities and welfare, diversification of cash crops particularly coconut, and improved market development for export. The overall thrust of the new Comprehensive Reform Programme for agriculture is one of increased smallholder commercialisation. Greater emphasis is to be given to agro-industries for the promotion of small-scale export enterprises and selected importsubstitution industries, particularly food-processing. In the area of agricultural exports, policy aims to provide high-quality, low-cost efficient services to facilitate growth, including improved wharf operations, upgraded quarantine procedures and the introduction.
of user-pays systems for inspections. Competition in copra and cocoa marketing is also being introduced. In the livestock sector, beef plays an important role with more and more land being converted from forest to grazing. Government policy seeks to encourage low-cost, high-quality beef production for both local and export markets, through measures such as the encouragement of competition in processing, the privatisation of public shares in abattoirs, and the regularisation of industry fees. Given the low status of women in Vanuatu's culture, women's role in agriculture is not recognised in many policies, including delivery of extension services. In this context, farming systems have not been improved. Indeed, they are not seen to be in need of improvement. For example, no assistance has been given to women in terms of appropriate technology (such as hoes for weeding). Additionally, women often walk for an hour, carrying everything by hand, to reach their gardens despite the obvious inefficiencies. Extension officers are mostly male4 and tend to address the chief and/or mostly male farmers who do not generally pass on knowledge to women. Until recently, extension services addressed the needs of cash crop producers, and the more recent emphasis on food production has met with resistance to change. Moreover, efforts to provide extension services to women through the employment of 6 female extension officers has met with resistance from women farmers who could not understand the issues being raised and were unwilling to accept advice from young women. More recently, however, women farmers have come to recognise their problems and to seek help from extension services on issues such as limited land availability, soil fertility, diversification of vegetables, etc. Assistance is also provided to women in the areas of food preparation, food preservation and nutrition. Agriculture and fishing is one of the "critical areas of concern" identified in the Women's National Plan of Action (Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995). The strategic objective in this area is "to recognise, promote and support women's.
participation in agriculture and fishing, both paid and unpaid activities - recognising women's role in food security". The Action Plan calls for: the collection of data on women's activities, including intrahousehold studies on the working of the family unit; appropriate agricultural support systems, extension and training for women; and recognition in agricultural planning systems of the wide range of agricultural activities necessary for family food security (including nutrition), cash cropping and the production of handicrafts.
2.2.2 Fisheries.
Fisheries remain a relatively underdeveloped sector of the Vanuatu economy even though marine resources are vast. A report on the needs and role of women in fisheries in Vanuatu is currently under preparation (FAO). Government policy aims to encourage and guide the private sector to exploit marine resources in a sustainable way. Strategies address management, fish licensing, etc. and do not refer explicitly to reef or subsistence fishing activities. Women are involved in the harvesting of reef produce for subsistence and cash. Income is also obtained from the sale of shells and shell jewellery.
2.2.3 Forestry.
Government policy relating to forestry is concerned with plantations for logging, including local supply plantations. It aims to create a secure environment for forest utilisation, harvesting and re-establishment with the intention of attracting landowner and private investment. Forest harvest licensing is to be limited to sustainable levels. Reforestation remains an outstanding issue. Pressures for land impede both natural regeneration and plantation redevelopment. These pressures are the result of increased needs for grazing and planting of cash crops and, in a few areas, the result of population growth. Subsistence agriculture also results in the destruction of primary and secondary forest. On one island at least (Pentecost), substantial areas of forest have been cleared.
for cash crops (such as kava which requires 5-7 years before harvesting). One of the consequences of forest clearing is the drying up of water supplies during drier weather. The task of carrying water from alternative sources falls largely on women. A second consequence is the lack of firewood, and women now have to walk substantial distances to gather firewood.
2.2.4 Natural Resource Management.
Although Vanuatu's natural resource management policy is contained in the National Conservation Strategy (Government of Vanuatu, 1993), comprehensive environmental legislation has yet to be put in place. The majority of land and sea resources are under customary control. The rights and duties of custom owners are enshrined in Vanuatu's constitution. The constitution states that "every person has a fundamental duty to himself and his descendants and to others to protect Vanuatu and to safeguard the national wealth, resource and environment in the interests of the present and of future generations". The role of Government is thus to educate communities in sustainable land and marine use practices. Several communities have taken steps to make their land protected areas whilst others are developing ecotourism and environmentally friendly income-generation programmes. The environment is another of the "critical areas of concern" identified in the Women's National Plan of Action (Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995). This Plan of Action calls for: recognition of, and an increase in, women's participation in environmental management and development; increased awareness of, and action in, defence of the environment; and the formulation of policies to address the question of the environmental effects of military-related and mining activities.
2.2.5 Rural Development.
The main themes of rural development policies concern increased economic self-reliance, improvement in the quality of rural and urban life, and more equitable development between regions and provinces. Sustainability is emphasised, based on.
community participation and a sense of ownership, together with environmental and gender sensitisation and their integration in mainstream development. The principal aim of the private sector development strategy is to improve investment, and thereby increase efficiency and productivity. The development of the private sector is, however, seen as retaining its customary communal character rather than encouraging individualism. The customary system and its subsistence mode of production is important in ensuring food and livelihood security. One policy objective is to expand on-farm and non-farm earning opportunities through the development of the agricultural and agro-industrial sector. Small-scale food processing is being encouraged by the Department of Primary Industries through its research and demonstration Food Processing Centre. At present only root crops are being processed (into biscuits, chips and powder) but plans are underway to extend coverage to fruits, etc. Other rural industries under consideration include: i) processing of pumpkin into powder for export as an alternative to exporting fresh pumpkin5; ii) yam powder production for export; and iii) fish canning as an alternative to fresh fish exports which involve significant handling problems. A recent initiative is to find employment for people within their own communities. For example, unemployed urban women are being encouraged to procure handicraft materials from their home communities for weaving in their urban homes. Urban dwellers are encouraged to grow food on whatever land they have available. In rural areas, families are being encouraged to employ local unemployed persons for a few hours. The National Plan of Action for Women identifies poverty as a "critical area of concern" for women. According to this document, as the traditional and cultural means of generating income disintegrate, women have come to bear the brunt of the burden in terms of managing food security, child-rearing, family health and household management. At the same time, customary.
mechanisms of support are rapidly losing their effectiveness given the changing social and economic conditions. The strategic objective is thus to recognise the increasing incidence of poverty in the country, particularly as it relates to female-headed households, and to promote means to address the root causes of this growing problem. In particular, the action plan calls for programmes to: help reduce the burden of women's multiple roles; promote equitable employment for both women and men; provide opportunities for women and men to actively pursue income-generating activities in their own communities; research and assess the poverty level and develop appropriate indicators. The Vanuatu Rural Development and Training Centres' Association (VRDTCA) is an NGO providing skills training to trainees, and training of trainers courses. The aim is to enhance the provision of appropriate vocational education and skills training for young men and women and their communities without (gender) discrimination. Areas covered include small business management, environment and health, and a curriculum on agriculture is currently being developed. The participation of women is not high and efforts are being made to encourage more women to take advantage of the training on offer and to become involved in management committees. This includes formulation of a gender policy which aims to provide equal access to all training facilities, scholarships, materials, information and instructions from male and female trainers, as well as gender-unbiased management structures.
The Samoan economy is predominantly agricultural with more than 70 percent of the economically active population employed in agriculture, fisheries and forestry (1991 Census). Recent years have been characterised by low productivity, low growth, balance of payments deficits, distortional policies and a dominant public sector, together with a heavy reliance on remittances and foreign aid. In 1995 agricultural exports accounted for 92 percent of all export earnings, though the sector's contribution to GDP fell from 45 percent in 1990 to 37 percent in 1995. In 1996-97, only 6.
percent of public investment went to the agriculture sector. The main thrust of the current economic policy is a continuation of the commitment during 1991-95 to promote the private sector as the engine of economic growth (Government of Samoa, 1996). This includes creation of a less regulated economic environment, continuing reform of the fiscal system (which will increasingly incorporate incentives to investment without the need for discretionary intervention); the sale of shares in stateowned enterprises (primarily to citizens), and determined efforts to make land more easily available for productive use. The productivity of land, labour and capital is to be increased whilst diversifying agriculture and rural economic activity. The public sector is to withdraw from many of its current services. Efforts to promote manufacturing are to concentrate on export-oriented activities.
2.3.1 Agriculture.
The main staple food crops in Samoa are giant taro (ta'amu), yam, coconut, banana and breadfruit. Taro was a staple and export crop until taro leaf blight devastated the crop in 1993/4. Recent production has also been affected by drought and cyclones. Beef, pork, chicken and eggs are also produced. Smallscale production of fruit and vegetables includes lau pele (a leafy vegetable), chinese and head cabbage, cucumber, tomatoes, pumpkins, beans, eggplant, sweetcorn, green pepper, and peanuts. Sweet potato is also grown but is not popular amongst Samoans. Most village households also keep livestock, including pigs, chickens, cattle, horses and goats. Plantation cropping of coconut and cocoa exists side by side with subsistence agriculture, and the two are often intercropped. Commercial agricultural production (mainly coconut, cocoa and taro) amounted to 14 percent of GDP in 1994, though the contribution of taro had already declined. Land previously used for commercial taro production is now increasingly used for cattle. At present, there is no comprehensive agricultural policy in.
Samoa. There are however various task forces including those for extension, research, marketing and farming systems (including women in agriculture). It is recognised that improved productivity in the traditional sector depends on effective extension and research services. Research and extension services are therefore to focus on improved farming systems and planting materials with an emphasis on mixed cropping, the promotion of new tree crops, cyclone resistance, and potential for processing and export. The distribution of seeds is a particular area in need of improvement. Livestock improvement will be restricted to cattle. Since the commercial farmer is seen as the chief source of dynamism, farmers are to be trained in marketing and business. The public sector role is being restricted to credit and land. Costs of agricultural materials and services will increasingly be recovered from users and agricultural subsidies and other support measures are to be phased out within a few years. Similarly, Government will withdraw from marketing (Government of Samoa, 1996). Women's involvement in agriculture has been viewed largely from the home economics perspective rather than the producer perspective. When the Ministry of Women's Affairs (MWA) was established in 1990, the home economics section of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery and Meteorology (MAFFM) was transferred to the MWA. Women are generally involved in home garden production, whilst men cultivate land further afield. The MWA promotes the production of (mainly) introduced vegetables and nutrition retaining cooking methods. A major constraint has been the supply of seeds. Women grow traditional subsistence crops and, as heads of households, benefit from extension services. Women also grow pandanus and mulberry for handicrafts, an important part of Samoan culture and income generation, but extension services do not usually extend to this area. Women's groups are now becoming interested in dairy farming as a means to improve nutrition especially among children. Women's Committees, one of three traditional groups in the community (the others being the matai or chiefs and the.
aumaga or untitled men), are also involved in agricultural development. The draft Policy for Women in Agriculture, developed as part of the farming systems policy, aims to establish policy guidelines to promote women's involvement in agriculture at all levels. Objectives for women in agriculture address extension services, training and public awareness. In extension, the aim is to improve women's involvement in agriculture through more frequent contact and a greater focus on women's agricultural activities and their importance in agricultural development. In particular, strategies cover the need for: an increased number of women in MAFFM especially among extension workers; gender training of extension workers; village nomination of women to liaise with extension workers; women's committees to assist extension workers; increased visits by extension workers to women; and gender sensitive extension material. In the area of training, improved management ability is to be achieved through increased awareness of the factors contributing to successful farming. Strategies include training for motivators of women's groups, establishment of resource centres for women in agriculture, planning village workshops on agriculture for women, preparation of training materials featuring successful women producers, and monitoring and evaluation of women in agriculture projects. In terms of raising public awareness, the objectives aim to improve public acceptance of women in agriculture as successful farmers, and to improve recognition of women and their significant contribution to national development. This is to be achieved through a community awareness programme focusing on women in agriculture.
2.3.2 Fisheries.
Fisheries contribute only 2 percent to GDP with three-quarters of the total catch for subsistence consumption (Government of Samoa, 1996). Although the subsistence fish catch has been in decline for many years, it is still four times as large as the commercial catch. Fish provides an important source of highquality protein for local consumption. Women are involved in the.
collection of seafood from the reef and in selling fisheries produce in the market. Inshore fisheries resources are declining due to over-exploitation, the use of destructive fishing methods such as dynamite, environmental disturbances and silting of the lagoon. A 1996 Mission Statement aims to ensure sustainable and optimum use of fisheries resources and to develop alternatives to inshore resources that have been seriously depleted. A new approach based on working with villages has been adopted whereby if an initial meeting with village matai (chief) is positive, MAFFM staff undertake a fact-finding exercise in the village and assist villagers to put together a management plan based on their own ideas and solutions to problems. Out of 45 villages, 21 have so far developed their own management plan and 14 have established marine reserves in their area to allow the reef to recover. Women are involved in this exercise as one of the three traditional groups with whom fisheries extension workers consult. Out of a total of 16 fisheries extension workers in 1997, only 4 or 5 were women6. Commercial fishing is mainly for tuna and deepwater bottomfish. Fresh tuna is exported, providing some employment in rural areas for both women and men. Offshore tuna is the only fisheries resource available for expansion. However, Samoa's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is not large enough to generate fish licensing fees from distant-water fishing nations. Commercial farming of mussels, oysters, giant clams and prawns is also to be expanded (Government of Samoa, 1996).
2.3.3 Forestry.
Forest reserves have been depleted to meet both subsistence and market agricultural production, since land use has not been intensified through increased capital or labour inputs. Forest resources were also degraded by cyclones in the early 1990s when 92 percent of plantation forestry was damaged. Although replanting had recovered more than 50 percent of the area under plantation by 1997, it does not yet provide wood for the domestic.
market, thus threatening indigenous forest resources. Only a portion of the indigenous forest area is merchantable and, at current deforestation rates of 3.5 percent per annum, merchantable forest is expected to disappear by 2005. Forestry policy is guided by five fundamental principles (Samoa Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 1994). These are: i) optimal and sustainable use through maintenance of ecological and economic forest value and sustainability; ii) forest protection through the safeguarding of plant and animal diversity, protection from fire, erosion and damage to water catchment areas, and maintenance of sacred/historical sites; iii) provision of basic human needs including traditional forest products such as food, water, fuel, medicines, building and cultural materials; iv) recognition of individual and collective responsibilities through increased appreciation of forests and the recognition of various interests in their control and management; and v) recognition of the role of forests in economic development including reforestation for domestic use, export and recreation. Policy objectives (Samoa Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 1994) aim to restore sustainable forest use. In the area of conservation, plans are to document and protect biodiversity, expand ecological reserves, ensure good forest management, and develop conservation programmes to protect threatened ecosystems and species. Water catchment areas are also to be better protected, and the clearance of forests for agriculture is to be discouraged. Indigenous forest utilisation is intended to be sustainable, necessitating the preservation of 5,000 ha of indigenous merchantable forest with 10,000 ha logged for decorative and customary purposes at a sustainable rate. Efforts to encourage community forestry conservation, reforestation and watershed management include increased royalties, community education, the promotion of multipurpose trees as cash crops, and tree planting on marginal land. Plantations and the timber industry are to be fully privatised with reduced capacity. Forest education will also seek to promote appreciation of the value of forests in biodiversity and human welfare and the interrelationship between development and conservation. Areas.
for recreation and tourism are to be identified and appropriate levels of protection ensured. These objectives also devote attention to improving documentation, research capacity and organizational structure.
2.3.4 Natural Resource Management.
Landlessness does not exist in Samoa because of customary rights. Land is held by the extended family and all members have rights, though distribution is not necessarily equitable. More than 80 percent of land is held under customary tenure. While on average households control 15.4 acres, a quarter of all households control less than 5 acres which is considered the minimum for livelihood security. Government land is now being subdivided and leased and a new land use policy is under formulation. Sustainability is threatened by a number of factors including the increasing use of herbicides and pesticides, and deforestation of upland areas for agricultural purposes. The area of land under cultivation has increased as a result of population pressure and cash cropping, but intensification has not taken place. Women play an important and recognised role in environmental management. Traditionally environmental sanitation and protection measures have been part of women's roles. However, it is only recently that recognition has been given to the environmental impact of development projects and the Government now requires environmental (and social) impact assessments for all projects.
2.3.5 Rural Development.
The heart of the Samoan economy is in the villages. More than 70 percent of rural households are engaged to some extent in agriculture, with two-thirds producing only or mainly for subsistence consumption (FAO, 1997). Thus the overall development strategy is to strengthen the involvement of the private sector in rural development. The strategy's central feature.
is the improvement of rural living standards, achieved through an increase in the productivity of land and labour, and the diversification of rural economic activities. Both employment creation and the expansion of livelihood options in rural areas are given importance. The equitable distribution of economic benefits through the traditional communal system is emphasised rather than the pursuit of individual profit (Government of Samoa, 1996). Efforts to make land more easily available pertain only to Government land which comprised some 11 percent of the total in 1996. Since 1997, Government land can be subdivided on a 49-year lease. Leases are put to tender, with the highest bidder securing the lease. Rents are reviewed after five years. This system clearly discriminates against the poor, and consequently against women. The land is nevertheless divided into both large and small parcels, also catering for smaller farmers. Diversification of the village economy is to include the encouragement of handicrafts (through the Development Bank and the Small Business Enterprise Centre) as well as small-scale food-processing and tourism, especially in conjunction with environmental protection. These areas are intended to benefit women. The Ministry of Women's Affairs is promoting economic capacity building through training in activities such as sewing, flower arranging, vegetable gardening, cooking and small business development. The National Food and Nutrition Policy for Samoa includes the encouragement of small local entrepreneurs in food processing industries. This policy also calls for income-generation activities in rural areas. The present policy applies the same business fee to informal traders and large formal businesses alike, and there is no policy framework to promote, support or regulate small traders. Similarly, there are no policy measures in place to ensure that small-scale credit is available to the informal sector, though a micro-credit scheme has been initiated by the Ministry of Women's Affairs. Traditionally, faaSamoa7 has ensured an equitable distribution of wealth and acted as a safeguard for women's rights within.
Samoan society. FaaSamoa meant that all members of the extended family would have access to shelter and adequate food. Yet indications today suggest that customary mechanisms are now operating less effectively than in the past. Poverty, particularly amongst women, has been identified as an emerging concern (Samoa Ministry of Women's Affairs, 1995). Social impact assessments, now a requirement for all projects, may help to address this. Rural development policies also seek to: improve education; address health issues arising from diet and lifestyle (including tobacco consumption); address the high natural increase of the population (2.4 percent per annum); increase the supply of electricity to meet demand; improve water supplies with the introduction of meters and charging; and improve sea and road transport (responsibility for plantation roads will pass to villages).
2 This project entitled "Incorporation of Women in Mainstream Development Planning" was funded by UNIFEM/AusAID/UNDP. It began in July 1990, initially for 2.5 years. The project aimed to increase the participation of women in all aspects of development through their incorporation in mainstream planning. 3 The 1993 policy mentioned in this section deals with all types of policy (agriculture, forestry, fisheries, social, economic, etc.) and was produced by the Central Planning Office of the Government of Fiji. 4 29 out of 35 extension workers were male in 1997 (personal communication with Mr. James Wasi). 5 Fresh pumpkin is currently exported to Japan, though more than half of the pumpkin crop produced fails to meet the strict size and shape requirements. 6 Personal communication with Mr. Ueta Faasili, 1997. 7 The term faaSamoa encompasses Samoan customs and traditions. FaaSamoa was founded on subsistence agriculture based on descent group tenure and land ownership. This system made basic resources available to all so that economic individualism was impossible. Egalitarianism was balanced by hierarchy, based on age and rank (Meleisea, 1987).
The Impact of Policies on Household Livelihood and Food Security.
Food security has not traditionally been regarded as an area of concern in Pacific Island populations. In normal times food is plentiful and it is only in times of crisis, such as in the months following a cyclone, that measures have to be taken to ensure that food is available to those in need. Whilst this paper is not concerned with such times of crisis, it is noted that a population that is food secure in normal times will be better able to cope with food insecurity during crisis periods. National food balance data for Fiji and Papua New Guinea show that the availability of food exceeds national requirements (defined as desirable energy intake needed for work and leisure and calculated on reference weights for the population) by a considerable margin (see Table 1). Since food availability in other Pacific Islands (with the possible exception of Solomon Islands) is commensurate with Fiji and Papua New Guinea, it can be surmised that food requirements are also more than adequately met in other Pacific Island populations. Table 1: Daily per Capita Food Availability in Kilocalories as a Percentage of Requirements (1990-92)8.
Country Food Availability 2769 Food Percent Requirement Availability 2170 2066 127.6 113.6 -.
Cook Islands Fiji.
Papua New Guinea 2347 Solomon Islands 1988.
Tonga Vanuatu Samoa.
Whilst food security might be achieved at the national level, accessibility to food differs between households (and indeed between individuals within households), such that household food security is not universal. Policies in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural development clearly have an impact on livelihood and food security. The nature of this impact is considered below for the three countries studied.
In Fiji, food security has been a long-term concern. Despite this, a recent study on poverty (Government of Fiji and UNDP, 1997) found that 33 percent of the population were living in relative poverty and 10 percent of households could not afford a basic diet. One reason for this is the past concentration on cash crops in the rural economy, with the result that there has been an overall reduction in the quantity and quality of food crops produced for household consumption. Available cash is spent on imported cereals, canned foods and vegetables. Other indications of an inequitable distribution of food are seen in the deteriorating national health situation with respect to noncommunicable diseases. At the World Food Summit in November 1996, the Fijian Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests indicated that Fiji remains committed to providing an environment conducive to attaining food security for all its citizens. During the 1980s, the aim was to achieve food security through protective policies, though this did not prevent the decline in household food production. More recently, the approach to food security has been changed to.
encompass an export-led agricultural policy in line with the overall emphasis on an export-led economy. The development of agricultural exports is seen as providing income-generating activities whilst at the same time improving food security. In particular, food accessibility and affordability is to be improved through consistency and quality of supply, which export-oriented production is intended to foster. In addition, an expanded export market is expected to generate a surplus for the domestic market, which in turn is necessary to absorb lower-quality produce and provide economic viability. Since most exported produce is grown by smallholders with 1-10 acres of land, this policy will benefit most producers. At the same time, the presence of larger farms producing for the same market, but with improved efficiency through mechanisation, ensures supply and hence keeps prices down. Prices are also kept down by larger plantings, now possible due to the existence of a larger local market and an expanding export market. Whilst this export-led approach to food security has many positive aspects, reservations have been expressed. The approach does not cater for very small farmers with less than one acre, many of whom are the rural poor and women. Whilst the rural poor may benefit from cheaper food prices, they will also suffer in that their own produce will not generate much income especially as gluts are likely to occur on the local market due to the larger scale of production for export. In addition, agricultural services will be less and less suitable for their needs. Despite ministerial statements, food security does not enjoy explicit policy status and resources are not allocated to food security per se. Policies that have some relevance for food security are those in agriculture and in health. However the former do not address the links to food security, either explicitly or implicitly, and the latter are concerned with curative measures rather than prevention of nutrition related diseases such as diabetes. The National Food and Nutrition Committee advises the Government on matters relating to food and nutrition. The draft.
Fiji Plan of Action for Nutrition (Fiji National Food and Nutrition Committee, 1996) promotes food security through, amongst others, improved availability and accessibility, increased production and consumption of local foods and increased acreage of agricultural land devoted to food crops. It also promotes family food production through backyard food gardens, community-based food production and food-processing enterprises, diversification of farming practices to strengthen home food production, and household food processing and preservation. The lack of resources allocated to food security is evident in the fact that the backyard gardening activities are to be implemented through women's organizations, whilst the remaining activities are to be implemented by the Department of Agriculture. Improvements in food security are occurring as a result of marketing developments. The emergence of urban squatter settlements, housing poor rural to urban migrants, has resulted in some squatters developing `middleperson' roles, in which they buy basic foodstuffs from rural farmers to sell in stalls in squatter areas. Since squatter settlements are found in various locations in Suva, this has improved food distribution and alleviated farmers of the need to go to, and spend time selling at, the central Suva market. This development also provides livelihood security for the squatters concerned and increases the productivity of farmers. Further marketing developments include packaging to reduce the time that women spend selling their produce at the market and to reduce food spoilage. Packaging also provides employment for women and increases farmer productivity.
3.2 Vanuatu.
Food security has featured relatively prominently in Vanuatu's recent development policies. One of the two key objectives of the Third National Development Plan 1992-1996 (DP3) is to expand the agricultural and natural resources sector in a sustainable manner so as to provide domestic employment, income generation opportunities, domestic food security and export.
revenue. In particular, DP3 focused on the development of subsistence farming and gardening, with special emphasis on enhancing women's agricultural activities and welfare, diversifying cash crops particularly coconut, and improving market development for exports. However, food security and women's role in agriculture feature less prominently in the new Comprehensive Reform Programme for Agriculture which emphasises increased smallholder commercialisation, agroindustries and small-scale export enterprises, and importsubstitution industries, particularly food-processing. Given the pivotal role of women in agricultural production, policies to address food security must address women's agricultural role. This was recognised in DP3, but in practice was found to be difficult to implement because of the low status of women and the existence of cultural norms. Development in this area is slow and will be a major constraint to the implementation of policies aimed at improving agricultural production. Thus, the Women's National Plan of Action (Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995) calls for the recognition, promotion and support of women's participation in agriculture and fishing, both paid and unpaid activities, in recognition of women's role in food security. The Women's National Plan of Action also identifies poverty arising from a breakdown of effective traditional and customary support systems as an area of concern. The increasing burden of women's multiple roles are compounded in areas where water and firewood now have to be carried longer distances due to environmental degradation. A consequence is that women have less time for agriculture resulting in decreased productivity, increased poverty and diminished food security. Vanuatu's National Food and Nutrition Policy was approved in 1986. Its overall objective is to ensure the nutritional well-being of the total population and increased self-sufficiency in food. To achieve this, three priority objectives were identified: i) to prevent and reduce the prevalence of under-nutrition in vulnerable groups; ii) to prevent an increase in the prevalence of nutrition.
related non-communicable diseases; and iii) to improve food security. The more recent Plan of Action for Food and Nutrition for 1997-2001 (Government of Vanuatu, 1996), formulated following the International Conference on Nutrition in 1992, expands these objectives to include increased food selfsufficiency and reduced dependence on imported foods and beverages, particularly those that induce nutrition related disorders. The Plan of Action for Food and Nutrition includes a National Household Food Security Development Plan, developed jointly by the Department of Agriculture and Horticulture and the National Food and Nutrition Committee. Project activities under this plan await resources for implementation. Priority is to be given in the first instance to urban areas, where home food production is to be promoted and extension services (including technical assistance and inputs) provided. This plan also calls for the institution of agricultural policies that promote food production, and the review of tariffs imposed on imported foods, which play a crucial role in ensuring household food security among urban dwellers. The need for income-generating activities and a minimum wage policy is also recognised. Strategies for rural areas include production of less land demanding cash crops, intercropping, and maximisation of available land that has already been cleared. Some training in horticulture is already being provided in urban areas by an NGO.
At the national level, food security is not an issue of concern in Samoa. However, relative poverty and food insecurity exist at the household and intrahousehold levels. Youth and some economically disadvantaged households in urban and peri-urban areas are at particular risk. Malnutrition is a significant health problem. In adults this takes the form of over-nutrition with obesity, hypertension and diabetes, whereas in children it takes the form of micro-nutrient deficiencies and protein-energy undernutrition, especially in infants. Iron deficiency anaemia also occurs in children and in pregnant and lactating women. The.
promotion of home gardens and nutrition education should help to overcome malnutrition problems, especially since part of the problem appears to stem from a lack of nutritional knowledge. In Samoa there is increasing dependence on imported food, the value of which now exceeds the value of all exports. This trend is likely to continue under the current economic strategy. Indeed one of the most likely outcomes of this strategy, according to expert consensus, is an "increased monetisation of the agriculture sector and increased dependency on cheap imported foods" (Government of Samoa, 1996:14). The fact that most people cannot afford the `cheap' foods currently imported indicates that food security will further deteriorate. Furthermore, cheap imported foods include foods such as mutton flaps and turkey tails which are nutritionally inferior to local sources of protein. The National Food and Nutrition Policy (Samoa National Food and Nutrition Council, 1995) includes, as one of four overall objectives, the achievement of environmentally sound and socially sustainable development to contribute to improved nutrition and health. Amongst the specific objectives is a reduction in the reliance on imported food through increased production of local foods, especially foods of high nutritional value, and the improvement of national and household food security. Home gardening is also promoted. MAFFM also promotes the production and consumption of local foods in cooperation with the National Food and Nutrition Council. By the year 2010, the Government aims to: eliminate moderate and severe protein-energy malnutrition; stabilise and/or reduce to below 1991 levels the incidence of diabetes, hypertension, obesity and heart disease; reduce by 20 percent present infant, child and maternal mortality rates; reduce the incidence of nutritional anaemia among 1-5 year olds and pregnant and lactating women; and increase breast-feeding of infants.
8 Source: FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Selected Indicators of Food and Agriculture Development in the Asia-Pacific Region, 1983-1993. Bangkok, 1994.
Gender-Disaggregated Data Needs to Address Policy.
The availability of reliable sex-disaggregated data is an important prerequisite for the formulation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes aimed at enhancing the role of women in agriculture, natural resource management and rural development. In that women play a pivotal role in livelihood and food security, sex-disaggregated data are needed to evaluate these securities. The FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development 1996-2001 (FAO, 1995) points to the need for statistical data on the role of women in agriculture and rural development. The establishment of a global database on women in agriculture and rural development was proposed in 1988 (FAO, 1988). In the Pacific, like the developing world in general, sexdisaggregated data on human resources in agriculture and rural development are not readily available (FAO, 1993). There is thus a need to specify data needs and appropriate sources. Table 2 identifies data needs and sources for the Pacific Island countries included in this study. These data needs are those required to monitor and evaluate the policies, strategies and plans detailed above, particularly in relation to gender roles in agriculture and rural development and to food security. These data are grouped into seven broad areas, namely economic activity, access to the means of production, time use and productivity, decision making, income and expenditure, food security, and education and training. Within each broad area, a range of data requirements are defined (column 2) and these are grouped into subject areas (column 1). The level (column 3) at which the data are required may be national or community (or both). The source, or the proposed source in the case of data items that are not generally available, is also provided (column 4) as is an indication of the status of the item in terms of general data availability (column 5). The table is not exhaustive in the range of data items required, but serves to provide a list of appropriate and feasible data for the specified purpose.
For example, policies to improve the delivery of extension services, especially to women, are informed by data providing the frequency of contact with extension workers and the type of service received by women and men involved in agriculture, whether large or small-scale. Such data could be7 obtained from records of extension activities made at the time of service delivery and incorporated into a farming systems database. However this is not currently done in most countries. In addition to the statistical data included in Table 2, other types of data are required to understand the changing roles of women in agriculture, rural development and food security. For example, detailed gender sensitive case studies of the farming systems currently practised are required to provide an adequate understanding of those systems for policy formulation and evaluation. A detailed study of gender roles would complement the data obtained from time-use studies. A detailed examination of such qualitative data needs is beyond the scope of this report. Table 2 Data Requirements Relating to Gender Dimensions in Agriculture, Natural Resource Management and Rural Development in the Pacific.
Subject Data Item Level Source/Proposed Status Source.
Economic Activity in Agriculture, Fisheries, Forestry and Rural Enterprises  persons economically active in agriculture NC (industry) by sex by employment status  persons economically active in agriculture NC (occupation) by sex by employment status.
Overall employment.
PC or LFS or HIES.
 persons economically active in agriculture NC (occupation) by sex by educational level  persons economically active in marketoriented agriculture NC (occupation) by sex by employment status  persons economically active in marketoriented fisheries NC (occupation) by sex by employment status  persons economically active in marketoriented forestry NC (occupation) by sex by employment status  persons economically active in subsistence agriculture and fishing N C (occupation) by sex by employment status.
Marketoriented employment.
PC or LFS: codes 611-613 of ISCO- A/t 88 at 4-digit level.
PC/LFS: codes 6151 and 6152 of A/t ISCO-88.
PC/LFS: codes 6141 and 6142 of A/t ISCO-88.
Subsistence activity.
PC/LFS: code 62 of ISCO-88.
 holders by sex by Farm holders household members N and labour working on holding by sex by age  holders by sex by household members N working on holding by sex by hours worked.
 holders by sex by household members working on holding by N sex by method of payment (cash/kind)  holders by sex by household members working on holding by N sex by whether main or secondary activity  holders by sex by hired labour on holding by sex by N permanent/occasional status  rural entrepreneurs Rural by sex by type of entrepreneurs enterprise.
Rural households.
 rural households with own activity in agriculture, fishing, forestry or handicrafts N by main source of income (e.g. crop or activity).
Access to Means of Production  holders by sex by marital status by size of holding by tenure  holders by sex by legal status by size of holding by tenure.
 horticulturalists by sex by size of land controlled.
 holders/ horticulturalists by sex NC by amount of credit during specified period  rural loans by purpose by sex of borrower  holders by sex by use of high yield seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and herbicides.
Agricultural inputs.
AC: appropriate list of inputs.
 horticulturalists by sex by use of high yield seeds, fertilisers, N C pesticides and herbicides Agricultural technology  holders by sex by use of introduced technology.
AC: appropriate list of tools and machinery.
 horticulturalists by sex by use of NC introduced technology  holders/horticulturalists by sex by frequency of N C contact with extension workers.
Extension services.
 extension workers by NC sex by type of service  holders/horticulturalists receiving extension NC services by sex by type of service  holders/horticulturalists NC by sex by adequacy of transport for marketing.
Time-use and Productivity  rural adult population by sex by time spent on specified domestic N C and productive activities  rural child/youth population by sex by time spent on NC specified domestic and productive activities  productivity of labour by sex by type of NC activity.
Genderdivision of labour.
Productivity.
Decision making  persons with cash income by sex by N degree of control over income.
 horticulturalists by sex by degree of control over decisions N C relating to cultivation of plot  households with cash income by members' degree of control over N C household income by sex of head/members  households by members' degree of control over household N C decisions by sex of head/members  membership and office-bearers of agricultural/rural organizations by sex.
HIES or FSDB or SS.
 involvement in community projects by N C sex National  Members of Parliament by sex  employees in relevant government positions by sex Food Security Nutritional status  anthropometric and other relevant N measurements by sex N.
 prevalence of diabetes by sex by age  prevalence of hypertension by sex by age  prevalence of anaemia by sex by age  prevalence of anaemia in pregnant and lactating women.
AR or NNS or HS A.
 prevalence of proteinN energy malnutrition  average food consumption per capita by type of food.
 calorie and protein consumption intake per capita by sex by age.
 prevalence of breastN feeding in infants Economic  monthly prices of major food items  monthly supply of major food items NC.
Income and Expenditure.
Household income.
 rural household heads by sex by household income by household size  distribution of rural household income by contribution of household members by sex by adult/child  distribution of rural household income by source of income.
Household expenditure.
 distribution of rural household expenditure N by sex of head of household by major expenditure items  average wage rates of agricultural labour by sex.
Education and Training Literacy Primary education Secondary  rural population by sex by age by literacy  rural primary enrolments by sex  rural secondary enrolments by sex NC PC A.
 secondary enrolments in agriculture option by sex.
Tertiary education.
 tertiary enrolments in subjects relevant to N rural development by sex by subject  overseas scholarships in subjects relevant to development by sex by subject  attendance in regional/overseas training workshops relevant to rural development by sex  participants in relevant government training activities by sex by subject  trainers by sex by subject  trainers in relevant subjects by sex by whether attended gender sensitisation workshop.
Community training.
Notes to Table 2 Level.
National Community.
AC Agricultural Census Administrative Records (of AR relevant institution) CPI Consumer Price Indices DS Dietary Survey Employment Survey ES FSDB Farming Systems Database Household Income and HIES Expenditure Survey HS Health Survey LFS Labour Force Survey NNS National Nutrition Survey PC Population Census SS Special Study TUS Time-Use Survey.
A A/t NA Data are collected as part of current data collection activities Data are collected but this level of detail is not usually tabulated Data not usually available.
Definitions Holding: an economic unit of agricultural production (usually an area of land) under single management by the holder. Holder: a person (or persons) exercising management control of the cultivation of a holding.
Legal status of holder: private (individual, household, two or more individuals from different households, two or more households, corporation, co-operative, other) or government. Horticulturalist: a person engaged in the cultivation of a plot of land too small to be covered by an agricultural census.
4.1 Data Availability and Unavailability.
The sources of the data items specified in Table 2 can be divided into three types: established censuses or surveys; administrative records; and farming systems databases. For the first and second of these, the producer and user are not usually the same. The producer is often the national statistics office or a statistical section of a government department, and the users are numerous. These sources follow internationally recognised definitions to allow for international comparison and as such are relatively inflexible. This includes the agricultural census. For the third type of data source, that is farming systems databases, the user and producer are often the same (namely the farming systems or extension section of the agriculture department) and data collection tends to be smallscale and flexible. The specification of data needs is the responsibility of the user but in practice is often done by the producer. This is partly due to the need to follow international procedures which in itself may lead to good data availability. It is noted in Table 2, for example, that data from population censuses which follows international procedures with a long history of sex-disaggregation are widely available. However, sex-disaggregation is less well developed in other sources where international procedures are also followed, for example the agricultural census. A second reason for users failing to adequately specify data needs is a lack of user expertise in this area. However, because of producer specification this leads less to outright unavailability than to a lack of relevant disaggregation. It is seen in Table 2 that relatively few of the specified data items are unavailable (NA), in other words they are not collected. It may also be the case that existing data collection instruments are unsuitable for obtaining the.
required data, even when specified by users. In such cases, for example for data on decision making, special surveys or studies are required. A lack of relevant disaggregation is the main reason for the current unavailability of data specified in Table.
Such data can only be made available if additional tabulations are produced. In fact, this option is often unavailable for existing data and hence only applies to future surveys. Lack of relevant disaggregation often refers to disaggregation by sex, but disaggregation by rural/urban area (or other geographical areas) may also lead to data unavailability. For example, when rural entrepreneurs are not distinguished from urban. One reason for a lack of disaggregation by sex or geographical area is that in some countries precedence is given to disaggregation by ethnicity or the indigenous/non-indigenous dichotomy. Further unavailability occurs when standard ILO codes for occupation (ISCO-88) and industry (ISIC) are not used in sufficient detail. For example, 4 digit codes are required if employment in market-oriented agriculture is to be distinguished from employment in subsistence agriculture. If such detail cannot be warranted in large data collection exercises such as the population census because of field conditions, smaller scale studies are required to provide the detail required. Indeed, in many cases data are more appropriately obtained through farming systems databases. Much of the data required at the local community level are best collected as part of extension and research activities at the community level. Such data are an important component of a farming systems database, as are other localised data sources such as special surveys designed to obtain additional data on topics of interest. Yet despite their advantages over other sources of being regularly updated and able to incorporate relevant detail, farming systems databases are not well developed in the Pacific. Thus much of the data specified in Table 2 as being best obtained from farming systems databases are not currently available.
Capacity Building in GenderDisaggregated Database Development.
Database development involves defining data needs, collecting and tabulating the required data or liasing with those responsible for data collection and tabulation, and the organization of data into a database such that they are accessible to users. Whilst the definition of data needs has been addressed above, it should be noted that the list of items specified in Table 2 is not exhaustive, and that in-country expertise in data needs specification is an essential part of capacity building. User ability to specify sex-disaggregated data needs depends on two factors: i) gender awareness; and ii) knowledge of statistical practices. Gender awareness may be defined as an in-depth appreciation both of the gender dimensions in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development and of the importance of gender-disaggregated data in addressing those dimensions. It should also be noted that, in that producers are involved in data needs specification, they too require a general appreciation of gender dimensions and the need to incorporate gender-disaggregation in tabulation plans. One strategy for capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development is thus to increase gender awareness amongst both users and producers. This strategy would lead to better recognition and definition of data needs and to more effective communication between users and producers. In order to increase gender awareness, it is recommended that advantage be taken of regional activities in gender awareness training such as those of the UNIFEM/AusAID/UNDP Pacific Mainstreaming Project. Several FAO member countries in the region, including the Cook Islands, Fiji and Papua New Guinea, have already taken part in this project, and government personnel involved in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development have received gender awareness training. It is recommended that FAO support future.
gender awareness activities in as much as they relate to agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development in FAO member countries. It is further recommended that FAO assist countries to incorporate gender sensitivity and sex-disaggregation into the data collection practices of forthcoming agricultural censuses, in accordance with new FAO procedures. The second factor in user ability to specify sex-disaggregated data is knowledge of the statistical practices involved in data collection. In general, such knowledge may be lacking especially where `non-agricultural' sources, such as population census or household income and expenditure surveys, are concerned. Users concerned with women in development issues are, in general, often unfamiliar with data collection. There is thus a need to improve user awareness of statistical processes. A second strategy for capacity building in genderdisaggregated database development is thus to increase statistical awareness amongst users. Again, this would lead to more effective communication between the users and producers of data. It is recommended that advantage be taken of existing regional assistance in this area (such as statistical training programmes of the South Pacific Commission) and that FAO support these activities in as much as they relate to agriculture, natural resource management and rural development. The collection of gender-disaggregated data obviously requires expertise in data collection methodologies. Where data are produced by national statistics offices or statistical sections of government departments, such expertise is generally well developed since these offices are staffed by statisticians. Where farming systems databases are concerned, however, expertise in statistical data collection is less well developed. A major reason for this is that farming systems staff and extension workers are trained in agriculture rather than data collection. In addition, whilst gender awareness training may sensitise farming systems and extension staff to the need for sex-disaggregation, a prerequisite is that data on human resources in agriculture be collected wherever appropriate rather than concentrating purely.
on crops and agricultural materials as has tended to be the case. There is thus a need to enhance skills in these areas. A third strategy for capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development is thus to enhance skills in farming systems database development. It is recommended that FAO provide assistance to member countries in the development of a farming systems approach to data collection and in farming systems database development. This could include the design, content and medium of the database, and data collection methodologies such as record keeping, small-scale surveys and rapid rural appraisal techniques. The form of this assistance would depend on current country capacity to take advantage of training in farming systems database development. If several countries are currently interested, assistance might take the form of a regional training workshop. However where interests are less coincidental, incountry assistance would be more appropriate. Finally, the organization of data into a database such that they are accessible to users should preferably involve electronic storage. A fourth strategy is thus to enhance skills in computer based data compilation. It is recommended that FAO support training in database management and the use of appropriate software as required.
Bibliography9.
AusAID, 1995. The Economy of Fiji: Supporting Private Investment. International Development Issues, No 40. Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID), Canberra, Australia. Fairbairn, P. and E. A. Dunlop, 1993. Women and Agriculture: South Pacific. IRETA and CTA. Apia, Western Samoa. FAO, 1988. FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development. FAO, Rome. FAO, 1992. Report of the Inter-Agency Consultation on Statistics and Databases on Gender in Agriculture and Rural Development. Rome, 24-26 September 1991. FAO, Rome. FAO, 1993. A Gender-Disaggregated Database on Human Resources in Agriculture: Data Requirements and Availability. FAO, Rome. FAO, 1995. FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development. FAO, Rome. FAO, 1996a. Guidelines for the Improvement of Statistics on Women: Obtaining Statistics from National Agricultural Surveys in Selected Countries of the Near East. FAO, Rome. FAO, 1996b. Masterplan for the Sustainable Management and Development of Vanuatu's Inshore Fisheries Resources. FAO, Bangkok. FAO, 1997 (draft). Vanuatu: World Food Summit Follow-Up: Draft Strategy for National Agricultural Development: Horizon 2010. FAO, 1997. Samoa: World Food Summit Follow-Up: Strategy.
Paper for National Agricultural Development: Horizon 2010. FAO and SPREP, 1996. Policies for Sustaining Food and Agriculture in the South Pacific. Technical Consultation of South Pacific Small Island Developing States on Sustainable Development in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Apia, Samoa, 6-9 May 1996. FAO and SPREP, Apia, Samoa. Fiji National Food and Nutrition Committee, 1996 (draft). Fiji Plan of Action for Nutrition. Government of Fiji, 1989. Report on Fiji Population Census 1986: Analytical Report on the Demographic, Social and Economic Characteristic of the Population. Bureau of Statistics, Suva, Fiji. Government of Fiji, 1993. Opportunities for Growth: Policies and Strategies for Fiji in the Medium Term. Parliamentary Paper Number 2 of 1993. Government Printer, Suva, Fiji. Government of Fiji and UNDP, 1997. Fiji Poverty Report. Government of Fiji and UNDP, Suva, Fiji. Government of Vanuatu, 1993. National Conservation Strategy. Government of Vanuatu, 1994. Vanuatu National Agricultural Census 1994: Main Report. Port Vila: Statistics Office. Government of Vanuatu, 1996. Vanuatu Plan of Action for Food and Nutrition (1997-2001). Government of Vanuatu and the United Nations, 1996. Sustainable Human Development in Vanuatu. United Nations, Suva. Government of Samoa, 1996. A New Partnership: A Statement of Economic Strategy 1996-1997. Meleisea, M. 1987. The Making of Modern Western Samoa.
Institute of Pacific Studies of the University of the South Pacific. Suva, Western Samoa. SPC/UNDP Household Food Security Development Programme, 1991. A Report on Household Food Security in Vanuatu. SPC, Noumea, New Caledonia. United Nations, 1996. Follow-Up to the Fourth World Conference on Women: Proposed System-Wide Medium-Term Plan for the Advancement of Women 1996-2001. UNICEF/Government of Vanuatu, 1991. A Situation Analysis of Children and Women in Vanuatu. UNICEF/Government of Vanuatu. Port Vila, Vanuatu. Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995. National Plan of Action. Vanuatu National Planning and Statistics Office, 1992. Third National Development Plan. Von Braun, J. Detlev Puetz, 1993. Data Needs for Food Policy in Developing Countries: New Directions for Household Surveys. International Food Policy Research Institute: Washington, D.C. Western Samoa Department of Statistics, 1991. Report of the Census of Population and Housing 1991. Apia: Department of Statistics. Western Samoa Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 1994. Western Samoa: National Forest Policy. Western Samoa Ministry of Women's Affairs, 1995. Western Samoa Country Report on Progress Towards the Implementation of the Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women. Western Samoa National Food and Nutrition Council, 1995. National Food and Nutrition Policy for Western Samoa.
9 FAO recognises Samoa as the official name of the country since 1996. Documents titles as published are used in the bibliography.
The Agricultural Census is carried out by the Department of Agriculture with no input from the Bureau of Statistics. The last census was conducted in 1991. A review after 5 years has been postponed to 1998. The next census is scheduled for 2001. A National Nutrition Survey is carried out every ten years by the Fiji National Food and Nutrition Committee. . The first National Food and Nutrition Survey was carried out in 1980 and the most recent in 1992. A national breast-feeding survey was conducted in the 1980s but the data were lost. The National Food and Nutrition Committee is keen to develop a simple nutrition surveillance program to supplement the decennial survey, and a feasibility study is required as a first step. Studies on the intrahousehold distribution of food are also required. The last Population Census was in 1986, however the military coups of 1987 and 1988 invalidated these data. Efforts were made to improve the question on economic activity in subsistence, and women's participation rates have increased as a result. Gender-disaggregation is good, but urban-rural less so; ethnicity is the first variable for disaggregation. A Household Economic Activity Survey was conducted in 1989-90. This was the first survey of its kind in Fiji. It covered urban areas, rural villages and rural settlements. Its main objectives were to: determine the types of economic activity of households; obtain data on the value of gross output and capital formation of the household sector; and improve data on the household sector contribution to national income. A secondary objective was to update demographic, education, social and economic details of individuals; this was done at the listing stage.
This is the closest that Fiji has come to obtaining time use data. There are at present no plans to carry out a time use survey. The 1990-91 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) is still being processed. Preliminary results show that it seriously underestimates income (since expenditure exceeds income) and does not capture women's subsistence activities since most women are classed as housewives. The next HIES is planned for 1999. It will collect information on income per person as well as household level income per commodity. The previous HIES was in 1977. A 1983 survey was not published due to data unreliability. The 1992-93 Employment and Unemployment Survey is also still being processed. This survey covers both urban and rural areas and distinguishes between subsistence activities for cash and own consumption, as well as covering two reference periods of 7 days and one year. It also underestimates income. The previous 1982 Employment/Unemployment Survey includes some data by gender, including data on migrant heads of households and time to find employment. Regular sources include quarterly employment statistics on the number and type of people employed in establishments by sector and an annual Employment Survey of establishments. Public sector employment data by gender are also available. Data gaps identified by the Department for Women and Culture include women in small business, the informal sector, and women's contribution in farming communities.
The Agricultural Census is conducted every ten years. The last one was in 1993. It lists farm labour, however data on subsistence production is at the household level. The first Agricultural Census was held in 1983/4. It obtained little on the human aspects of agriculture; where economic activity data are available, women's activities are significantly under-represented.
because domestic work is classed as their main activity. Some time-use data are available, but these also under-report the work activities of women. The 2003 Census will include fisheries information if funding provided funding is available. An annual Smallholder Agricultural Survey has been held since 1989, the latest being in 1997. This survey uses the 1989 population census as a frame and is hence household-based. It is rural and covers all Vanuatu's islands. Since 1991 or 1992, it has included the gender of labourers. This survey has a core of questions to which modules can be added. There have been no time use surveys. A Market Survey concentrated on transport and prices. A Smallholder Cattle Survey was conducted in 1985. A National Nutrition Survey was conducted in 1996. The previous survey, undertaken in 1983, provided good quality data with detailed tabulations, including disaggregation by urban/rural however not by gender. A 1985 Dietary Survey also exists together with a 1985 Non-Communicable Diseases Survey. A 1997 Household Income and Expenditure Survey is in the planning stages, although funding has yet to be secured. This survey is intended to cover urban and semi-urban areas and some rural villages near semi-urban centres. Data on individual wage-earners will be collected, and subsistence production for cash or subsistence will be at the household level. A Family Income and Expenditure Survey was carried out in urban areas only in 1985. Disaggregation was by ni-Vanuatu/expatriate head of household; there was no gender disaggregation. A Women in Business Survey was conducted in 1994, and an Informal Sector Survey was also conducted in 1994. An urban Employment Survey was held in 1983 covering the private sector. This has ni-Vanuatu/European disaggregation and data on wages, salaries, hours, etc. by educational qualifications, age, ethnicity, type of establishment, etc.. The latest Population Census was in 1989. Special efforts were.
made to improve data on economic activity in this census; gender biases are low. The previous census was in 1979 when high female participation rates were also recorded. The next census is planned for 2000. In general, disaggregation by gender is often missing in Vanuatu since disaggregation by ni-Vanuatu/expatriate is given priority.
The last Agricultural Census was in 1989, but the results were invalidated by two cyclones in 1990 and 1991. It contains little on human resources. The next Agricultural Census is planned for 1999. Both the Statistics Office and Department of Agriculture are involved in this activity. Surveys on agricultural production cover both commercial and subsistence production, but are not people-related. Surveys on extension are carried out by the Department of Agriculture. A Market Study was recently carried out for a sample population of 51 traders at a market in Apia. It has not been analysed by sex. This survey asked questions about transport and commodities. Problems identified by the producers included: shortage of family labour; plant disease; transportation (between plot and house, and house and market, with most people relying on public transport); and social commitments and regulations made by village councils (such as bans on the use of chemicals). The availability of land was not identified as a problem, despite the fact that more marginal lands are now being used. The last Population Census was in 1991 and the next is due to be held in 2001. Gender biases exist in data on economic activity. The 1991 census obtained information on women's informal sector employment. A Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) was expected to take place in June 1997, with a sample of 2000 households. One of its purposes is to evaluate women's work. The survey was designed to obtain socio-demographic.
information about household members, as well as details of the income and source of income of each member. Expenditure information is at the household level. The last HIES was carried out in 1977.
Fiji Principal Economist, Agriculture Department, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests (MAFF) Principal Nutritionist, National Committee on Food and Nutrition Statistician, Department for Women and Culture Senior Assistant Secretary, Department for Women and Culture Acting Senior Forest Officer, Environmental Division, Forestry Department, MAFF Information Officer, Forestry Department, MAFF Statistician, Household Surveys, Bureau of Statistics Graduate Trainee, Household Surveys, Bureau of Statistics Acting Principal Resource Assessment Officer, Fisheries Department, MAFF.
Mr Paula Taukei.
Ms Seini Seniloli.
Ms Tupou Vere.
Ms Kiti Makasiali.
Mr Inoke Wainiqolo.
Mr Malakai Sevudredre.
Mr Toga Raikoti.
Mr Raj Naidu.
Mr Mala Puiloa.
Mr Steven Kalsakau.
Director, Department of Agriculture and Horticulture Principal Agriculture Extension Officer, Department of Agriculture and Horticulture Training Officer, Department of Agriculture and Horticulture Second Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fisheries and Environment Planning Office, National Planning and Statistics Office Statistics Office, National Planning and Statistics Office Executive Officer, Culture and Religion, Department of Women's Affairs Third Secretary, Ministry of Justice, Culture and Women's Affairs Training Development for Women, Vanuatu Rural Development Training Centre Association Nutrition Section, Department of Health.
Mr James Wasi.
Mrs Annick Steven.
Mr George Pakoa.
Dr George Plant.
Mr Jacob Isaiah.
Mr Asal Lazare.
Mr Josiah Tom.
Mrs Hellen Michel.
Mrs Maturine Carlot.
Samoa Mr Ken Lameta iomaga Society (NGO concerned with environmental issues).
Mr Seve Imo.
Deputy Director, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery and Meteorology (MAFFM) Agricultural Economist, MAFFM Agricultural Economist, MAFFM.
Mr Maletino Teofio Mr Siliva Moala.
Ms Luagalau Foisaga Eteuati Secretary, Ministry of Women's Affairs Shon Ms Christine Quested Ms Kerry Calvert Faamoe Mr Maturo Paniani Mr Ueta Faasili Mr Magele Crawley Ms Faatonu Faletoese Nutritionist, Ministry of Health Senior Nutritionist, Ministry of Health Watershed Management Officer, MAFFM Chief Fisheries Officer, MAFFM Head, Statistics Department President, Women's Committee Organization.
International organizations Dr Vili A Fuavao Sub-Regional Representative, FAO South Pacific Office Integrated Resources Management Officer (Land and Water), FAO South Pacific Office Programme Officer, FAO South Pacific Office.
Mr Owen Hughes.
Mr Tevita Keresoma.
Ms Jane Patterson Dr Peggy Fairbairn-Duncan Ms Urmila Singh Ms Jiko Luveni Dr Stephen Chee.
Project Officer, Health and Nutrition, UNICEF Consultant, UNICEF Programme Officer, UNFPA Programme Officer, UNFPA Director, UNFPA Country Support Team for the South Pacific Programme Manager, Agriculture Programme, South Pacific Commission, Fiji Office World Health Organization, Samoa Office South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) Resident Representative, UNDP, Samoa Office.
Dr Malcolm Hazelman.
Ms Pam Messervy.
Ms Neva Wendt.
Mr Anthony Patten.
Food and Agriculture Organization of ISBN: 974-86644-2-2 the United Nations Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAP) Bangkok, Thailand RAP Publication: 1999/7 January 1999.
