Land­water linkages in rural watersheds.
"Deforestation in the Himalayas blamed for killer flood" ­ headlines such as this one from August 2000 suggest that upstream land use practices have important impacts on water resources and affect the people downstream at a watershed scale. Payments by downstream people to upstream people for "environmental services" such as good water quality, less sediments or more regular water flow are widely discussed. However, much controversy exists about the direction and magnitude of such impacts, how they influence the relation was between upstream and downstream people, and if cooperation mechanisms are feasible which allow for a sharing of the resulting benefits and costs by all resource users in rural watersheds. To address these issues, the FAO Land and Water Development Division organized the electronic workshop "Land­Water Linkages in Rural Watersheds" during September and October 2000. About 470 people from all over the world subscribed to this electronic forum. Discussions were grouped around three main questions:.
What are the biophysical impacts of upstream land uses on downstream water resources in rural watersheds?.
How can these impacts be valued in terms of benefits and costs to downstream people?.
Which mechanisms can be identified to share these benefits and costs among upstream and downstream land and water users? The present volume contains an analytic summary of the workshop discussions as well as two discussion papers prepared for the workshop on the basis of a literature review. In keeping with the electronic character of the workshop, the complete materials are included on the CD-ROM that accompanies this document. It is hoped that the wealth of information supplied here will shed some light on the issues surrounding the provision of water-related environmental services by upstream land management activities.
Acknowledgements.
The FAO Electronic Workshop "Land­Water Linkages in Rural Watersheds" was organized by Benjamin Kiersch with support by Jean-Marc Faurès of the Land and Water Development Division. Valuable inputs were provided during the planning and preparation stages by Thomas Hofer from the Forest Resources Division, and Sally Bunning, Tudor Botzan and Rod Gallacher from the Land and Water Development Division. Constance Neely (University of Georgia) helped greatly in organizing the conference by contributing the "Landscape­Lifescape" concept. Thorgeir Lawrence assisted with the moderation of the workshop and prepared the first draft of the workshop proceedings. The synthesis report was prepared by Sylvia Tognetti, who also finalized the abstracts of many case studies. Jippe Hoogeveen and Wolfgang Prante contributed to the preparation of the CD-ROM and the workshop Web site. The organizers would like to acknowledge the authors of the background papers: Ian Calder, Norman Peters, Michel Meybeck, Bill Deutsch, Jim Orprecio, Allison Busby, Janeth BagoLabis, Estela Cequiña, Marta Echavarría and Jan de Graaff, and all the active participants who contributed their knowledge and experience in numerous interventions and case studies. Finally, special thanks are due to Lynette Chalk for the efficient preparation of the text and formatting.
Page FOREWORD ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS LIST OF BACKGROUND PAPERS LIST OF CASE STUDIES SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS SYNTHESIS REPORT OF THE FAO ELECTRONIC WORKSHOP Sylvia Tognetti DISCUSSION PAPERS.
LAND USE IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES: A LITERATURE REVIEW Benjamin Kiersch.
INSTRUMENTS AND MECHANISMS FOR UPSTREAM-DOWNSTREAM LINKAGES:.
A LITERATURE REVIEW.
iii iv vi vii 1 9 33 35.
Benjamin Kiersch ANNEXES.
ABSTRACTS OF BACKGROUND PAPERS.
ABSTRACTS OF CASE STUDIES.
LIST OF INTERVENTIONS.
WORKSHOP PROGRAMME.
DOCUMENTS AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM: DISCUSSION ARCHIVE Verbatim records Summary of discussions WORKSHOP EVALUATION LIST OF REGISTERED PARTICIPANTS.
List of background papers (available on CD-ROM).
Land use impacts on water resources Ian Calder Water quality degradation affects on freshwater availability: impacts of human activities Norman E. Peters and Michel Meybeck Community-based water quality monitoring: from data collection to sustainable management of water resources William G. Deutsch, Jim L. Orprecio, Allison L. Busby, Janeth P. Bago-Labis, Estela Y. Cequiña Valuation of water-related services to downstream users in rural watersheds: determining values for the use and protection of water resources Marta Echavarría Downstream effects of land degradation and soil and water conservation Jan de Graaff.
System requirements to use the CD-ROM:.
PC with Intel Pentium® processor and Microsoft® Windows 95 / 98 / 2000 / Me / NT / XP or Apple Macintosh with PowerPC® processor and Mac OS® 8.6 / 9.0.4 / 9.1 / X 64 MB of RAM 24 MB of available hard-disk space Internet browser such as Netscape® Navigator or Microsoft® Internet Explorer Adobe Acrobat® Reader (included on CD-ROM).
List of case studies (available on CD-ROM).
Optimizing soil fertility and plant nutrition to prevent groundwater pollution. Austria. Peter Cepuder, Volker aus der Schmitten Inter-relationships between agriculture and hydrology in lowland areas. The case of the Angura watershed. Burkina Faso. C. Cudennec, Y. Sinaré, Daurensan Impact of upstream irrigation dams on surface hydrology. The case of the Yvel watershed. France. C. Cudennec, M. Sarraza Can participatory land use planning at community level in the highlands of northern Thailand use GIS as a communication tool? Oliver Puginier Agricultural practices and water quality in Saskatchewan, Canada: a sociological perspective. Randall Kehrig Economic effects of changing water quality on an irrigation scheme: a case study from South Africa. Jack Armour Development of small watersheds. Cuba. Miguel Hernández Bauzá, Nilo Alfonso González Integrating biophysical, ecological, and social research for catchment-scale management of water resources: the Motueka river initiative. New Zealand Breck Bowden Tracing sediment transport with Cs-137 isotopes: The Chasovenko catchment case study, Central Russian Federation. Valentin Golosov, Vladimir Belyaev Southern highlands irrigation infrastructure refurbishment project. Australia. Stephen Arnold Land-water linkages in the upper Niger watershed. Guinea. Sény Soumah Watershed development ­ or should it be watershed management? The Kawad Project, Karnataka, India. C. Batchelor, M. Rama Mohan Rao, K. Mukherjee Indo-German watershed development programme Gujarat: a baseline survey. India. Andreas Groetschel, Ingrid Müller-Neuhof, Ines Rathmann, Hermann Rupp, Ximena Santillana, Anja Söger, Jutta Werner Combating drought in Rajasthan through the watershed approach. India. B.K. Kakade.
Environmental impacts and vulnerability of water resources in the Berdawni rural watershed, Bekaa, India. T. Darwish, M. Khawlie, I. Jomaa, R. Chihny Water quality and management in peri-urban Kumasi, Ghana. D.F.M. McGregor, D. A. Thompson, D. Simon Agriculture and nitrogen pollution of water in Brittany, France. Séverine Gibet Small hydraulic structures and their impact on farmers' lives, streamflow, soil and water conservation and downstream water resources: the cases of the Siliana and Kef watersheds. Tunisia. Mohamed Mechergui The Romwe catchment study ­ the effects of land management on groundwater resources in semiarid Zimbabwe. P.B. Moriarty, C.J. Lovell The influence of a headwater wetland on downstream river flows in Sub-Saharan Africa. Zimbabwe. Africa. Matthew McCartney A quantitative treatment on the influence of catchment features, based on GIS, on fish production in Sri Lankan reservoirs. Sri Lanka. Sena S. De Silva, U.S. Amarsinghe, C. Nissanka The Goulburn broken water quality strategy. Australia. Pat Feehan Integrated land and water management in the upper watersheds of the Aral Sea basin. Tajikistan. S. Aslov Collective action to fight soil erosion in Réunion. Denis Groene, Alain Hébert, G. Benoit Micro-dams for rainfall water retention in central-west Brazil: pilot project on water and soil conservation in the micro-basin of the Paiol. Luciano Cordoval de Barros The impact of drainage of agricultural soils on annual runoff: an example from the Brie region. France. Claude Cosandey, Marie-Josée Penven, Tatiana Muxart Water quality and rural society: Potential health risks in the lower Río Colorado watershed. The case of the Mexicali Valley. Mexico. Alfonso Cortez Lara Estimation of basin sediment flux in the Pang Khum Experimental Watershed in northern Thailand: The contributions of roads and agricultural lands. Alan D. Ziegler, Thomas W. Giambelluca, Ross A. Sutherland Influence of land use on the hydrological properties of volcanic soils: the case of catchments providing water to Andean cities. Ecuador. W. Buytaert, B. De Bièvre, J. Deckers G. Dercon The watershed protection fund (FONAG) as a mechanism for the conservation of the cayambecoca and antisana reserves in Ecuador. M. Echavarría Impacts of irrigation development on small-scale aquatic resources: a case study of southern Laos. Sophie Nguyen Khoa, Kai Lorenzen, Caroline Garaway, Robert Arthur, Bounthanom Chamsingh, Douangchith Litdamlong, Nick Innes-Taylor, Darrell Siebert.
Summary of conclusions and recommendations.
This report synthesizes the proceedings of the electronic workshop "Land Water Linkages in R u r a l Watersheds" hosted by the FAO Land and Water Development Division from 18 September to 27 October 2000. The workshop examined relationships between land use and water resources in rural watersheds. It identified mechanisms and instruments for sharing benefits and costs resulting from land use impacts on water resources between upstream and downstream stakeholders in a watershed context, as well as priorities for further work.
CLASSIFICATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF LAND USE IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES.
Classifications of biophysical impacts have tended to reflect the concerns of better studied areas, which are disproportionately in northern temperate zones, and have much higher average rates of runoff than arid and semi-arid countries. Much less is known about processes that are important in the arid and semi-arid countries, where water stored in soil may be more important than surface water, and erosion and sedimentation rates are naturally much higher. The most significant impacts of land use are often associated with infrequent and extreme events. For example, the greatest transport of eroded sediment and pollutants will occur during large rainstorms, during extreme storm events such as hurricanes or when heavy rains follow a period of drought. Impacts also vary depending on the affected peoples' location, and to the extent that the people depend on affected resources for their livelihoods, or have other options. Ranges of variability of natural processes are the most important parameter for identifying actual and potential impacts of land use practices. Land use impacts are compounded by the complexity of hillslope processes and, potentially, by climate change. The knowledge of natural processes relative to the impact of anthropogenic land use change is critical for development of effective and appropriate response strategies. Given that impacts of land use on water resources are the result of complex interactions between diverse site-specific factors and offsite conditions, standardized types of responses will rarely be adequate. These relationships can be better understood through the use of process models, which must be combined with site-specific assessment. Watershed management is understood to include livelihood concerns, including both socioeconomic as well as biophysical components. Workshop discussions provided suggestions to revise the classification to better reflect concerns more specific to developing countries in general, where poverty alleviation is a more dominant consideration. Recommendations:.
A typology of biophysical impacts of land use on hydrological processes should be revised to include recharge of soil moisture, which is more significant in arid semi-arid lands.
Ranges of variability in natural watershed processes need to be established as a basis for identifying the range of actual and potential human-made land use impacts, including the influence of climate change.
With regard to hydrological and sediment-related impacts, river dynamics and lowland processes should be distinguished from hillslope processes to identify which process is dominant, and to find adequate management responses.
CHANGE IN THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF LAND­WATER INTERACTIONS WITH THE SIZE OF THE WATERSHED: CONSIDERATIONS OF SCALE.
As a general rule, impacts of land use activities on hydrological and sediment-related processes can only be verified at smaller scales (up to some tens of square kilometres) where they can be distinguished from natural processes and other sources of degradation. This suggests that the use of economic instruments and mechanisms will also be most effective at this scale. Assumptions that relationships observed at smaller scales hold at the largest scales, and that processes observed in one particular region can be applied to another, have often led to inappropriate and ineffective responses, because different processes are dominant at different scales. Certain impacts of land use on water quality, such as salinity, have an impact at larger scales as well. At the largest scales, impacts are difficult or impossible to verify because of a long time lag between cause and effect, and many overlapping factors. This makes it difficult to arrive at agreements between users about rights and responsibilities needed to implement mechanisms for sharing costs and benefits at large river-basin scales. Recommendations:.
Impacts and responses to them need to be considered at the appropriate scale ­ efforts to change land use practices and to implement mechanisms for sharing of benefits and costs will be most successful in response to measurable problems in small basins.
At larger scales, long-term monitoring is needed because of the long time lag between cause and effect. Mechanisms of sharing costs and benefits at these scales will most likely deal with water quality concerns.
ADEQUACY OF EXISTING KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING OF BIOPHYSICAL IMPACTS OF LAND.
Although much is known about watershed processes, such knowledge is often used to make generalizations that are not always appropriate. Site-specific information is often inadequate to determine which management actions will be most effective, which makes stakeholder negotiations difficult. Community involvement is needed to identify and agree on causes of and responsibilities for land use changes, and to develop institutions and functions to reduce risk and manage disasters associated with land use practices. There is a need to build greater capacity for site-specific research, which could be supported through the development of long-term hydrological monitoring and forecasting systems. In all regions, a better understanding of large scale and cumulative effects is needed.
Recommendations:.
More emphasis should be placed on participatory research, as well as long-term monitoring and assessments, which should clarify uncertainty for stakeholders.
Biophysical processes singled out as research priorities are: soil water retention capacity, groundwater processes, and variability of land use impacts across spatial and temporal scales.
TOOLS AND METHODS FOR ASSESSMENT OF THE RELATION BETWEEN LAND AND WATER RESOURCES.
Tools and methods of assessment range from particular methods applied to the understanding of individual processes, to more integrated and participatory approaches. Though slow and expensive to initiate, participatory approaches increase the potential for research to have impacts on policy. Other advantages include simplicity, cost-effectiveness and local relevance, that may outweigh potential bias and lack of precision, which can be calibrated through comparisons of results with researchers. Among the parameters selected for ease of monitoring are: eroded soils and sediment contamination of streams, altered stream flows and soil export, bacterial contamination, demographics and land use, and community perceptions, memories and experience. It will be easier to find agreement among stakeholders on narrower, more technical indicators. However, conflicts among different interest groups may be inherent in deciding which impacts matter and in selecting appropriate indicators. Recommendations:.
Site-specific process models should be developed that allow local conditions to be considered in the design of interventions.
Project budgets and timelines should allow for stakeholder participation in research and in monitoring efforts.
Researchers should work with stakeholders to develop and apply acceptable measures of quality in participatory research and monitoring efforts.
Indicators need to be scientifically validated, of relevance to the affected community, be practical to measure, and relatively inexpensive.
The need for negotiation and conflict resolution should be anticipated in the selection of indicators.
TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS TO ASSESSMENT OF LAND USE IMPACTS ON WATER.
By definition, a watershed approach implies addressing complex issues in large areas over long periods of time. This is difficult to achieve in a narrow technical framework and with budget limitations. Since financial and technical means are usually limited, uncertainty and the need for value judgements become inherent in decision-making. These constraints can be partly overcome by providing technical and financial support for community-based efforts, and by explicitly.
considering issues of governance and institutional arrangements that determine which benefits and costs are considered in the assessment, and how these are distributed among stakeholders. Recommendations:.
Researchers and donor organizations should work in partnership with and provide technical and financial support for community-based efforts in the assessment process.
Assessment of land use impacts on water resources should include examination of governance and institutional arrangements that determine the distribution of benefits and costs among stakeholders, including those associated with uncertainty.
VARIABILITY, UNCERTAINTY AND MYTHS ABOUT LAND­WATER LINKAGES.
In the absence of complete information, overgeneralizations or myths about links between land use activities and hydrological processes have emerged, such as "deforestation causes flooding" regardless of basin size, or "deforestation causes erosion" even where natural erosion rates are high. These generalizations, which cannot be verified, and in some cases have been disproved, by scientific analysis, are still frequently used as justifications for policy and programmes. Such myths may selectively single out particular causes from multiple ones in order to support institutional and political agendas, and may be a convenient basis for advice because their assumptions are unverifiable. This leads to misguided policies and remedial approaches that do not work, and often results in poor and minority populations in upland areas being made scapegoats, despite their contributions to a problem often being minor relative to other factors. Due to the complexity of landscape processes and the long time lag between cause and effect, uncertainty is inherent in any scientific findings and assumptions about land­water interactions. This uncertainty needs to be made very explicit to avoid the emergence of new myths. Recommendations:.
General statements about land­water interactions need to be continuously questioned to determine whether they represent the best available information and whose interests they support in decision-making processes.
The uncertainty inherent in findings about land­water interactions needs to be made explicit to avoid the emergence of new myths.
VALUATION OF LAND USE IMPACTS ON DOWNSTREAM WATER RESOURCES.
Impacts of land use practices can be distinguished in impacts on use values and non-use values. Use values can be further distinguished into consumptive, for example irrigation and domestic use, and non-consumptive values, for example transportation. Water bodies and riparian areas may also have significant non-use values, for example as reservoirs of biodiversity. It is equally important to consider the distribution of costs and benefits between upstream and downstream users, as well as within communities. The analysis of affected values is an important basis for selecting the most appropriate benefit-sharing mechanism.
Uncertainty regarding links between upstream land use activities and impacts on downstream resource users also creates uncertainty regarding economic values. However, even partial values may be sufficient to justify investments in watershed protection. When differences with and without a project do not show significant benefits within the time frame of the analysis, less tangible and less certain costs and benefits can be considered. The decision will then primarily be based on consideration of societal benefits or equity concerns, in addition to the immediate monetary benefits. Recommendations:.
To value costs and benefits of changes in specific land use practices, the ideal is to be able to identify how those changes will affect the availability of specific resources of concern, and their value to users. This can be made more manageable by dividing the watershed into hydrological sub-units based on uniform agro-climatic conditions.
The results of valuation should be communicated to stakeholders and used to identify existing land use incentives. Since complete information will rarely be obtainable, it is important to clarify limitations of the valuation, which factors have been included, and the degree of uncertainty.
When the more tangible and monetary costs and benefits are not sufficient to justify investments in watershed management, the decision should be presented as a matter of policy, including societal and long-term benefits.
BENEFIT-SHARING MECHANISMS FOR LINKING UPSTREAM AND DOWNSTREAM USERS.
Mechanisms and instruments consist of a broad range of approaches ranging from regulatory and market instruments, education and awareness building activities, to development of new institutional arrangements and participatory approaches. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. Rather, they seem to work best when different instruments are used in combination, and applied simultaneously at different scales. In the process of scaling up resource management from site level to watershed level, it is important to ensure that all stakeholder groups people are represented in watershed associations that transcend individual villages and in negotiations over large-scale problems. Appropriate mechanisms need to take into account the distribution of benefits and costs within the communities themselves, both upstream and downstream, and incentives of different stakeholders, based on economic valuation and existing property rights. Stakeholder cooperation is more likely if benefits are demonstrable, the distribution of benefits as well as costs is considered fair and acceptable, and agreements are enforceable. It may also be motivated by the threat of regulation. Successful initiatives have evolved over time, from management of a water body to management of its whole catchment, or from narrow and ad hoc to broad intersectoral initiatives, often with the assistance of Non-governmental organizations (NGOs). At the largest scales, given the difficulties of linking cause and effect, river basin negotiations tend to emphasize water allocation issues and provide a basis for sharing benefits and reducing costs through more general economic cooperation.
Recommendations:.
Economic instruments are likely to be more effective if they are combined with education and awareness building activities, and participation by affected people, for example through watershed organizations. Successful mechanisms have evolved from a narrow to a broad focus or from management of a water body to the whole catchment area.
The development of stakeholder associations with decision-making autonomy should be promoted starting at the smallest scales, to ensure that local interests are represented in negotiations over larger-scale problems, and to reduce transaction costs. NGOs can play an important role in this institution-building process.
CONSTRAINTS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF BENEFIT-SHARING MECHANISMS.
Implementation of mechanisms and instruments may be constrained by conflicts between the objectives of sustaining livelihoods and natural resources, and between different stakeholder groups. Other constraints maybe posed by equity considerations and the acceptability of the instruments' distribution function. For example, transfer payments for watershed protection may not be seen as fair as they may violate the "polluter pays" principle and create perverse incentives. Such payments, when these are necessary and appropriate, may be complemented by taxes on pollutants. On the other hand, such payments may be equitable considering the income situation of the rural poor in marginal upper watershed areas. Lack of property rights and capacity for collective action may constrain the adoption of management practices if expected benefits are long-term. Finally, if significantly affected stakeholders are excluded from the process, they may have an incentive to sabotage any initiatives taken. Recommendations:.
Stakeholders should be involved in the initial phase of management interventions, and be provided with information about the distribution of costs and benefits and equity implications.
Establishment or recognition of property rights should not overlook customary tenure arrangements that may otherwise be put at a disadvantage in formal land titling programmes.
One should be realistic as to what participatory approaches can achieve in terms of priority concerns: for example, small-scale erosion control measures typically implemented through such approaches may not have a big impact on downstream sedimentation when structural measures are needed to prevent landslides or streambank erosion.
CRITERIA FOR SUCCESS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF BENEFIT-SHARING MECHANISMS.
For benefit-sharing arrangements to be successful, stakeholders must at least have a common understanding and agreement about the nature of expected impacts, the approximate magnitude of costs and benefits, and also about areas of uncertainty. This is best achieved at smaller scales, where anthropogenic impacts can be verified and distinguished from natural processes. At such scales, people will be more likely to be willing to make the necessary commitments for resolving interest conflicts and reaching agreements.
When there are numerous stakeholders, establishment of watershed organizations is an important way to make negotiations manageable and reduce transaction costs, provided that the organizations are representative of all of the relevant interest groups, that they have a transparent and autonomous decision-making process, and are appropriate to the scale of the watershed. Perhaps the most important incentive for stakeholders to participate and invest resources in benefit sharing arrangements is the assurance that they will in fact have access to the benefits, which often take time to materialize. Security of tenure is an important factor in the adoption of watershed management practices, as well as recognition of traditional resource use rights. Regardless of whether the above criteria have been met, initiatives to establish mechanisms for sharing benefits and reducing costs are still unlikely to succeed unless stakeholders accept them as fair. The process of assessment and valuation of land­water interactions can provide an important input to such deliberations because it clarifies costs and benefits, and also how they are distributed among different stakeholders. It provides an opportunity for mutual learning among stakeholders, whose local knowledge can provide insight into the context of the situation and feasible options. Finally, the assessment process can improve feedback between science, local knowledge and policy. The criteria for successful implementation of benefit-sharing instruments in a watershed context, as modified by recommendations made throughout the discussions, are as follows:.
There is some common understanding and agreement among stakeholders regarding the impacts of upstream land use on downstream water use, as well as awareness of uncertainty.
The groups of upstream and downstream stakeholders are generally few and well organized.
The economic impact of land use on downstream stakeholders can be approximately quantified.
There is a political commitment to establish upstream-downstream linkages whether it is through contractual agreements or through policy frameworks, and some underlying technical basis for it.
There is a strong institutional and legal framework, including land tenure structure, which allows for the implementation of benefit-sharing instruments.
There should be decision-making autonomy for those who pay and who benefit, and a transparent mechanism for deciding how the money is spent.
Management interventions and also watershed associations should be appropriate to the scale of the river basin.
Basin treaties should be acceptable to all riparians, for equitable use, protection and management of water resources in basins.
Information about impacts, and their potential costs and benefits, needs to be communicated using common methods of expression.
Synthesis report of the FAO electronic workshop.
INTRODUCTION.
An electronic workshop on "Land­Water Linkages in Rural Watersheds" was held from 18 September to 27 October 2000. Its goals were to:.
· examine relationships between land use and water resources in a watershed framework,.
and how these affect upstream and downstream stakeholders;.
· identify focal areas and recommendations for further work with regard to land and water.
management, in particular with regard to the distribution of costs and benefits between upstream and downstream resource users;.
· provide a forum for exchange of knowledge and information regarding mechanisms and.
instruments to link land and water management through the re-distribution of costs and benefits between upstream and downstream resource users. Key questions addressed in the workshop were outlined in an introductory note. Supporting documents included two discussion papers, five background papers, and 31 case studies. There were 471 participants, 38 of whom made contributions, comments and suggestions for future activities. The interventions were summarized on four occasions as the workshop proceeded. A full documentation of the workshop materials is included in the CD-ROM, which accompanies the present document. This report draws on relevant material from the interventions, case studies and background documents. Although the key questions from the introductory note provide the general outline for this report, some of them have been grouped together to reflect better areas of emphasis in the discussions. They are grouped into two main categories: the Landscape Perspective, which contains questions regarding biophysical impacts, and the Lifescape Perspective, which contains questions that pertain to the benefits and costs to upstream and downstream resource users, and economic and policy instruments that can be used to redistribute them more equitably as well as create incentives to reduce impacts.
PART I: LAND­WATER LINKAGES ­ THE LANDSCAPE PERSPECTIVE.
Relationships between land and water are complex, as they consist of numerous and simultaneous processes that vary across spatial and temporal scales, are non-linear, and occur in watersheds.
Sylvia Tognetti, Consultant, Takoma Park, MD, USA, with inputs from Thorgeir Lawrence, Consultant, Rome, Italy.
with heterogeneous characteristics.1 Moreover, impacts of land use practices depend heavily on interactions among site-specific biophysical characteristics, as well as on socio-economic factors. Assessment of these impacts, and development of appropriate response strategies, therefore requires a good understanding of this context. In addition to the identification of impacts themselves, development of appropriate response strategies requires an understanding of causes, ranging from management strategies to socio-economic incentives that influence them. The following two sub-sections review biophysical aspects of land use impacts on water resources and management strategies, with a focus on unresolved issues, following the typology proposed in Discussion Paper 1, as well as issues related to their assessment. Session 1: Understanding and categorizing land­water linkages Classification of impacts Discussion Paper 1 proposes a typology of land use impacts on water resources that can be used to assess biophysical impacts of land use practices on water resources. Based on discussions and observations, a category has been added for soil moisture recharge, and also for impacts on ecosystems and aquatic resources:.
Impacts of land use on the hydrological and sediment-related processes a . Mean surface runoff b. Peak flow/floods c . Base flow/dry season flow d. Groundwater recharge e . Soil moisture recharge f. Erosion and sediment load.
Impacts of land use on water quality g. Nutrients and organic matter h. Pathogens i. Pesticides and other persistent organic pollutants j. Salinity k. Heavy metals l. Changes in thermal regime.
Impacts on ecosystems and living aquatic resources. In addition to distinguishing surface from groundwater supply, it is important to distinguish soil moisture, which is generally more important than surface water in semi-arid environments, though impacts on it have lower off-site consequences. In semi-arid countries such as in Africa, runoff coefficients are generally much lower than in the United States and European countries (10 percent compared to 40-50 percent), which also suggests the difficulty of making generalizations based on parameters found to be important in one or the other.2 Discussion paper 1 and background papers 2 and 3 provide a more thorough overview of impacts of land use and management practices on hydrology and on water quality. Examples of actual impacts and problems encountered in their assessment, can be found throughout the case.
Cudennec, Intervention 7 Moriarty, Intervention 39.
studies. Since what is considered an "impact" depends on the relative significance to various stakeholders, these are addressed more extensively in the sections on assessment and on valuation of land­water linkages. Identification of land use impacts on water resources The single most important parameter for determining impacts may be the ranges of variability of rainfall, runoff and water flows, particularly in arid areas.3 This is because many hydrological impacts are dominated by extreme though infrequent events. Transport of sediment and other pollutants disproportionately occur during these events because they are linked to increases in water volume and velocity. Given their high variability, average yearly rates are irrelevant for predicting actual rates of sedimentation.4 Climate change is also an important consideration, as it may increase the frequency of extreme events including local droughts, intense rainfall with increased soil erosion and runoff, flooding, sea level rise and coastal inundation.5 In the identification of hydrological impacts, another important distinction is between hillslope elements and the hydrographic networks that drain hillslope flows. Hillslope processes play a more important role in smaller watersheds, and where structural management changes, such as dams, have altered their temporal scale. Because of their more diversified topography, they also interact with rainfall in more complex ways. Case study 2 presents a methodology for distinguishing these hillslope from lowland processes, and case study 3 provides an example of the relationship between hydrological impacts and geographical patterns in an upstream watershed.6 Participants provided examples of structural measures upstream that are constructed with a view to improving downstream hydrology, including: · small hydro projects upstream to prolong life of dams downstream;7 · development of low-cost microdams to contain surface runoff damages, retain pollution, and favour recharge of water tables;8 · construction of reservoirs to enhance downstream flows;9 and · revival of traditional water harvesting systems such as the Paals in India9a. · There was also speculation that the siting of rice terraces could be optimized relative to watershed lag-time to reduce flooding.10 Variation of land use impacts under different agro-ecological conditions and management practices The significance of land use impacts also depends on management practices, and on agroecological and socio-economic conditions that determine vulnerability and response capacity ­ the latter will be further discussed below in the section on valuing land­water linkages. With respect to management and agro-ecological conditions, background paper 1 provides an extensive discussion of the role of management practices and other parameters that need to be considered in determining whether or not forests control erosion, reduce flooding, regulate flows, increase.
Peters and Meybeck, Background Paper 2 Faurès, Intervention 4 5 Fairchild, Intervention 34 6 Cudennec, Intervention 7 7 Mechergui, Case Study 18.
Cordoval de Barros, Case Study 25 Davidson, Intervention 16 9a van Etten, Intervention 18 10 Cudennec, Intervention 7.
runoff and improve water quality, all of which depend on interdependent or competing and site-specific processes.11 An example is provided in Box 1.
BOX 1: FORESTS AND DRY SEASON FLOWS IN A SEMI-ARID.
ENVIRONMENT.
W h e t h e r or not forests increase or decrease overall annual runoff may depend also on the age of the forest, and hence the extent of the canopy and rooting systems, light and re-growth, and effect on soil organic matter and leaf litter: they generally reduce runoff volume compared with crops that have less biomass, with the exception of cloud forests. Older forests may also generate more runoff due to less re-growth. Some of the factors that affect whether planting of trees controls erosion include: existence of an understorey, grazing (which can lead to soil compaction and removal of understorey plants), road construction, logging techniques, pre-planting drainage activities, weight of trees and also the size of their leaves, because they modify drop size, which determines the extent of splash-induced erosion. Cultivation, drainage, road construction and soil compaction during logging are thought to have more influence on flood response than just the presence or absence of forest. Site-specific assessment is therefore necessary to develop appropriate responses to impacts. Relative importance of anthropogenic and natural causes Understanding the consequences of land use decisions, and the development of appropriate responses implies the ability to distinguish these impacts from natural processes and their variability. This is particularly evident for issues associated with erosion and sedimentation rates, for which several case studies were discussed that also illustrate management implications. For example, if the amount of erosion generated by farming practices in a dam catchment is insignificant compared to natural erosion, changing those practices will not change the impact of sedimentation on the dam. The design and siting of the dam itself may simply be inappropriate in an arid and semi-arid area where high erosion is an inherent element of landscape processes ­ as is suggested in a case from Zimbabwe (see Box 6).13 Other factors that make it difficult to distinguish anthropogenic from natural causes include: climatic variation and rainfall patterns; the long time lag between cause and effect, particularly at larger scales; and the reluctance to invest on already degraded lands. These are also illustrated in experiences from Morocco (see Box 2), and the Russian Federation (see Box 3). Change in the relative importance of impacts with the size of the watershed: considerations of scale As can be seen in the examples of Morocco and Zimbabwe, scale is a key parameter in the problem of detecting impacts of land use. Many myths about land use impacts are based on the extrapolation of effects observed at smaller scales to large ones, for which the most well-known case is the attribution of severe floods in Eastern India and Bangladesh to deforestation in the Himalayas (see Box 4).
Whether or not the presence of forest increases d r y season flows will depend on infiltration properties of the soil and on climatic conditions. P l a n t i n g of exotic tree species of pine and eucalyptus in a semi-arid climate such as South Africa not only reduced dry season flows but also dried streams completely and generated very deep soil moisture deficits that prevented their return and the recharge of aquifers for five years after the trees were felled.12.
Calder, Background Paper 1 Calder, Background Paper 1 13 Moriarty, Intervention 26.
BOX 2: MOROCCO ­ NATURAL VERSUS MAN-MADE CAUSES OF SEDIMENTATION14 In the preparation phase for a large-scale watershed management project in Morocco, hydrologists were requested to assess the possible impact of the project for reducing sedimentation of reservoirs. Sedimentation is a critical problem for Morocco's large dams, as they are the main source of water for the country's large irrigation systems and cities. In 1994, 8 percent of their total capacity had already been lost. The watershed areas range from 1 000 to 50 000 km2, with a variation in sediment yield between 300 and 3 000 t/km2/yr, depending on the geology of the watershed. There was an expectation that hydrologists could quantify the extent to which proposed land conservation practices would reduce sedimentation of reservoirs, and that these impacts could then be valued and accounted for in the overall financial analysis of the project. It became clear to the hydrologists, however, that the impact on sedimentation of reservoirs would be negligible, regardless of the extent of land included in the programme. The main reasons were: · The areal extent of land that could benefit economically from erosion control measures represents only a small percentage of the total area of each watershed and could therefore contribute only marginally to the reduction of sedimentation. · Using the participatory approach, efforts concentrate on the improvement and reduction of erosion of farmer's land, whereas the badlands, which are the areas contributing the most to sedimentation would not be treated by the project, as they were not of interest for farmers in the uplands. The high rate of natural erosion compared to human-induced erosion was regarded as a serious constraint. · The alarming rate at which dams are filling implies the need for an action that can have immediate effects. Any significant action in upland areas would only be expected to show benefit after several decades due to the size of the watersheds. This was not an option that could be considered by the Water Resources Department, which then had to find other remedial actions. · The extremely high variability of the erosion and sediment transport processes made any assessment of the average yearly rate irrelevant: most of the erosion and sediment transport occur on the occasion of extreme events, (such as storms that lead to landslides) on which soil and water conservation actions would show little impact. In conclusion, it was not possible for the hydrologists to significantly quantify the impact of watershed management activities on sedimentation in reservoirs. Different results might apply to other areas, with smaller watersheds and different geological conditions, but, in this specific case, each of the reasons given above was sufficient to discard any clear linkage between land management and water resources.
BOX 3: RUSSIAN FEDERATION, DEGRADATION OF SMALL RIVERS IN AGRICULTURAL ZONES15 A team at Moscow State University studied the problem of degradation of small rivers within different landscape zones of Russia, where the area under tillage has increased by up to 50 percent or more of the total area over the last 300 years. The existence of high quality old maps enabled them to compare changes in river lengths at different times during the period of intensive agriculture. It was found that the total length of the small river net decreased by 30-50 percent during this period because of changed surface water runoff and increased sediment input from cultivated slopes to the river valleys. Natural fluctuations in precipitation were probably the main cause of river-net degradation, as these fluctuations correlated with the level of the Caspian Sea. However, increased volume of sediment from cultivated slopes, which filled up the small river channels, also contributed significantly. In this example, a combination of anthropogenic and natural causes influenced the degradation of water resources. A quantitative assessment of the influence of natural and anthropogenic factors requires a detailed spatial and temporal analysis. A recommendation for research arising from this experience is to define sediment delivery coefficients for small watersheds, considering the different pathways from agricultural land to river channels.
Faurès, Intervention 4 Golosov, Intervention 19.
BOX 4: DOES FOREST REMOVAL IN THE UPLANDS CAUSE FLOODING IN THE LOWLANDS? THE CASE OF THE GANGES-BRAHMAPUTRA BASIN16 An example of media headlines for this region states that: "the severe floods in Eastern India and Bangladesh are not the result of a natural disaster, but of a ruthless exploitation of wood which has been practised over centuries in the forests of the Himalayas". Headlines such as these are based on assumptions that the forest cover in the Himalaya is rapidly decreasing, which only holds true for certain areas, e.g., the Western Himalayas of Pakistan. Also, that there is a direct link b e t w e e n forest removal in the Himalayas and flooding in the lowlands of the Ganga and Brahmaputra river systems, and that the mountain people with their forest management practices are responsible for the inundations in the plains ­ a highly sensitive statement. The newspaper statement reflects the still widespread wrong assumption that land­water linkages observed in small and medium sized watersheds can be extrapolated to large watersheds. In many studies, it can be documented that in small watersheds the human impact on land­water influences is dominant. In medium sized watersheds it is already difficult to distinguish between man made and natural impacts on the land­water linkages. In large watersheds, natural factors (e.g., heavy rainfall events and deep landslides) clearly are the dominant links between land and water. There is, of course, a significant contribution of "base flow" from the highland catchments of the Brahmaputra and the Ganga to the floods, but this input is just one element of many others and is not a flood triggering one. The natural rates of weathering and erosion in this tectonically active steep land zone are high, and sediment transport is a dominant process irrespective of vegetation cover. Inappropriate land use practices may still have disastrous consequences within a highland watershed, but conservation practices should not be undertaken with the expectation that they will prevent floods in the lowlands.
The consequences of such myths are further discussed in the following section on assessment and dealing with uncertainty. As a general rule, as suggested by Ta b l e 1, impacts of land use on hydrological and landscape processes can only be verified within small basins, and most of the case studies in fact pertain to small-scale watersheds. At l a r g e r scales, natural processes are dominant, which make it difficult to d e t e c t any change as a result of conservation practices, particularly on a short time scale. Impacts on water quality can be observed at much larger scales and, in some cases, have been well documented and quantified even in larger basins. However, when dealing w i t h multiple sources of multiple pollutants, one-to-one linkage of causes and effects may remain elusive.
TABLE 1 Measurability of land use effects by basin size.
Basin size [km2] Impact Type Average flow Peak flow Base flow Groundwater recharge Sediment load Nutrients Organic matter Pathogens Salinity Pesticides Heavy metals Thermal regime 0.1 x x x x x x x x x x x x 1 x x x x x x x x x x x x 10 x x x x x x x x x x x ­ 102 x x x x x x x ­ x x x ­ 103 ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ x ­ ­ x x x ­ 104 ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ x x x ­ 105 ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ x x x ­.
Legend: x = Measurable impact; ­ = No measurable impact Source: Discussion Paper 1.
Information on the scale at which land use practices have a verifiable impact on water resources availability and quality is crucial for discussing the feasibility of benefit-sharing.
Hofer, Intervention 5.
instruments between upstream and downstream resource users. Obviously, when land use impacts do not extend beyond the plot level, it does not make sense to talk about benefit-sharing arrangements on a watershed scale. When they do extend beyond the plot level, the extent to which upstream causes can be linked with downstream effects, and the degree of uncertainty, will determine the agreements that can be made between stakeholders toward a more equitable sharing of costs and benefits. As a result, there are differing opinions as to whether further work on land­water interaction should be limited to small and medium scale watersheds of up to a few hundred square kilometres. Land­water interactions are only easily measurable at the small scale. While working on minimizing sedimentation in a micro-dam in a catchment of five square kilometres may be worthwhile, trying to improve land management at a larger scale, for instance, in Ethiopia in the hopes of seeing a result at the Aswan dam, is not.17 Similarly, improving tank maintenance in India will lead to measurable improvements in local groundwater, but will not affect flooding in Bangladesh. Rehabilitation also takes less time in smaller watersheds.18 However, it also is important to consider that natural resource managers often have to make decisions about complex cases at larger scales. The relevant scale will clearly depend on the type of impact addressed.
Adequacy of existing knowledge and understanding of biophysical processes Much is known about environmental processes involved in land­water linkages. According to one contributor, this knowledge is sufficient to take care of probably 90 percent of land use problems in the world's watersheds, and the remaining ten percent is simply a matter of refining techniques.19 Methods to inventory soils, geology, vegetation, climate, demographics are well known. Geographic Information Systems and computer programs help to develop model variations for different contexts. The real issue is getting people to understand that after years, and probably centuries, of manipulating a watershed without either understanding "the big picture," not caring, or being a victim of historic, difficult-to-break practices, it may take years of efforts and improved practices to prevent or mitigate degradation. Others contend that the existing knowledge base is based more on perceived wisdom or myth than on science, which can lead to considerable misallocation of resources. This often occurs when inappropriate generalizations are made, for example by extrapolating from small to large scales, or by making assumptions about processes in arid and semi-arid regions based on observations originating in wet temperate ones.20 In addition to the need for more basic research in arid and semi-arid regions, this underscores the need for more site-specific information, which may require more emphasis on participatory research and monitoring. This is an approach emphasized in many of the case studies. Knowledge is not always sufficient to determine which management actions will affect downstream water availability. This makes negotiation difficult. An example is seen in the case study regarding the Rio Paute catchment in the southern Andes of Ecuador,21 analyzing effects of land use on water retention capacity (see Box 5). Other areas singled out as needing more research include groundwater processes, and changing land­water linkages at spatial and temporal scales.
Moriarty, Intervention 26 Stevens, Intervention 32 19 Stevens, Intervention 32.
Calder, Background Paper 1 Buytaert et al., Case Study 29.
Scientists are not immune from the vested interests of their institutions. One contributor suggested that obfuscation benefits these interests, as well as those o f consultants and scientists whose existence and livelihoods are dependent on the fostering of crisis scenarios and the design and implementation of what m a y be economically indefensible amelioration schemes.22 For example, the wisdom and economic benefits of soil conservation programmes, which have been widely promoted in Africa and Asia, are now under question.
Box 5: Impacts of land use on soil water retention capacity in the southern Andes In the catchment of the Rio Paute in the southern Andes of Ecuador, soils have a high water retention and regulation capacity because of the presence of allophane clay, in which hollow spheres are formed that store water. Although cultivation is known to affect h y d r o p h y s i c a l properties, it is not clear which phenomena control the retention and release of water (i.e., whether it is retained in soil, in vegetation, in organic matter layers, in swamps, in lakes, or in forests, etc.). Traditional analytical methods do not seem to apply as they are based on concepts of e q u i l i b r i u m between gravitational, capillary and hygroscopic forces ­ other forces are active in the andosols. Therefore, it is not clear which actions of stakeholders will affect downstream water availability.
Given the inherent complexity and u n c e r t a i n t y of land and water r e l a t i o n s h i p s , it will not always be possible to have complete information, or to wait for further information before making critical decisions. Inadequacy of knowledge may only become apparent when things go wrong and new problems arise that go beyond the realm of past experience. This reinforces the need for an adaptive approach to management, which is more flexible than a narrow technical framework that assumes complete information can be obtained, at least in principle. Much progress can be made through a process of assessment that identifies existing information of relevance for decision-making and makes it accessible to stakeholders. Greater emphasis is also needed on long-term monitoring because not enough is known to make reliable predictions over long periods of time.23 Session 2: Assessing and perceiving land­water linkages Assessment refers to the process which links knowledge to decision-making. It involves selecting relevant information as well as conducting relevant research. What is regarded as relevant depends on policy objectives. It may focus on narrow technical questions from the perspective of a single discipline or, through a more integrated and participatory approach, synthesize information from both biophysical and socio-economic disciplines and engage stakeholders in defining the problems, providing information about the local context and identifying the range of management options. Tools and methods for assessment of the relation between land use and water resources Many assessment tools have been found to be inadequate for understanding the complex interactions between land and water, although triangulation between results of measurements taken at different times, scales and places, and using different methodologies, can reveal inconsistencies and shortcomings. For example, many estimates of erosion are based on plot experiments that only measure the amount of soil moved. However, much of this soil remains within a watershed. One study in eastern Zimbabwe found that the amount of sediment leaving.
Calder, Intervention 11 de Graaff, Intervention 44.
a small headwater catchment never exceeded 5 t/ha, though plot based experiments reported 70-100 t/ha.24 The Andean case study (Box 5) raised questions about the ability to make generalizations based on the use of standard methodologies for identifying key factors that control the retention and release of water in soils, because of differences between the actual hydrophysical properties of the Andean soils examined in the study, and assumptions. The authors speculate that the problem may be pertinent to other soils as well.25 The complexity of processes involved in land and water interactions suggests the need for detailed, site-specific models. Better understanding of land use effects on dry season flows, for example, could be achieved through models that consider vegetation, soil physical properties including hydraulic conductivity and water content properties of the soil, and their spatial distribution. A better process for understanding erosion could be achieved by considering the effect of vegetation type, such as size of leaves, which influences drop size, and by relating vegetation type, soils and slope characteristics to specific soil conservation techniques.26 Methods of assessment provided in case studies range from describing the application of particular methods to understanding specific watershed processes, to more integrated and participatory approaches. These include:.
· comparisons between measurements and model results, and use of models to compare.
outcomes under different management scenarios;27.
· surface flow measurements taken in locations selected to be able to isolate hillslope from.
lowland processes;28.
· use of caesium isotope deposits as a tracer to examine sediment distribution throughout a.
· chemical analysis of water upstream and downstream from contamination sources and.
engagement of the community in monitoring, by providing monitoring tools that can be easily understood;30.
· statistical analysis of correlations between fish catch data in reservoirs and land use maps of.
the reservoir catchments;31.
· comparison of basin sediment yield with yield from individual sources, to identify those that.
contribute to it disproportionately, e.g., unpaved roads;32.
· comparisons of the results of household surveys regarding perceptions of nitrate pollution,.
with well samples and nitrogen budgets;33.
· a participatory process of land use classification and mapping to reveal traditional and existing.
land use practices, and engage local people to take their own resource management initiatives;34.
· an Integrated Catchment Management framework to integrate technical knowledge with.
social learning, to develop knowledge and tools that can provide common ground for decisionmaking;35.
Moriarty, Intervention 26 Buytaert, Intervention 29 26 Calder, Background Paper 1 27 Cepuder et al., Case Study 1; and Armour, Case Study 6 28 Cudennec et al., Case Study 2 29 Golosov and Belyaev, Case Study 9.
McGregor et al., Case Study 16 de Silva, Case Study 21 32 Ziegler et al., Case Study 28 33 Cortez Lara, Case Study 27 34 Puginier, Case Study 4 35 Bowden, Case Study 8.
· a Water Resource Audit to consolidate existing data from a wide range of sources, and to.
highlight discrepancies between scientific knowledge and local perceptions of problems;36.
· a Participatory Landscape/Lifescape Appraisal (PLLA) to understand community perceptions.
and water quality concerns, and to foster community involvement in the development of relevant indicators and monitoring.37 Some observations from the latter study were that community involvement increases problem awareness and, subsequently, the probability that the research will have a policy impact. Although slow and expensive to initiate, it has the potential for longer lasting benefits. In this case, the indicators were incorporated into the local government's Natural Resource Management Plan and became part of an ongoing citizen water quality monitoring programme. The lack of precision and possible bias inherent in community monitoring needs to be weighed against the advantages of simplicity, mobility, cost-effectiveness and local relevance through comparisons with results of researchers. Other practicalities are that it may also be useful for identifying hotspots for restoration activities, and is faster than waiting for complete scientific understanding.38 Parameters and indicators that are easy to monitor Development of meaningful indicators of water quality that could be easily monitored by community volunteers and by a local government was the explicit objective of the study reported in Background Paper.
The criteria used to select the indicators were that they were based on scientifically valid methods, relevant to the community, and practical and relatively inexpensive. The parameters selected were:.
· Community perceptions, memories and experience ­ obtained through PLLA; · Eroded soils and sediment concentration in streams ­ obtained from measurement of total.
suspended solids (TSS) during base flow conditions and just before and during selected rainfall events;.
· Altered stream flows and soil export ­ low-tech approaches were developed for estimating.
stream depth, area and current velocity to indicate alteration of stream flows; this stream flow data was then combined with TSS data to estimate soil export;.
· Bacterial sontamination of water ­ a new and relatively low cost method was used to take.
measurements in four major tributaries and at community drinking water faucets throughout the municipality; and.
· Demographics and land use ­ this was derived from government census and remote sensing.
data, and used for comparison with other data collected and to identify patterns; for example, a correlation was found between the decrease in forest cover and water quality degradation. Other indicators of biophysical changes mentioned that could be easily measured were:39.
· soil accumulation in a flood plain, which is visually indicated by the burial of root crowns of.
small trees and shrubs;.
· visual evidence for decreasing runoff and flood peaks are smaller channels, more stable.
tributary channels (with smaller deposits and more vegetation) and less frequent and less severe flooding;.
Batchelor et al., Case Study 12 Deutsch et al., Background Paper 3.
Deutsch et al., Background Paper 3 Bunning, Intervention 40.
· change in habitat and populations of fish and aquatic organisms, to indicate change in water.
quality, increased sediment load, stream channel instability, and more frequent and violent floods;.
· estimate of sediment yield from small hill slope catchments by measuring the volumes of.
sediment accumulated in excavated farm dams of known ages.40 Two case studies examined land use impacts on fisheries, focusing on effects with livelihood importance to local populations, and impacts that can be integrated in benefit-cost analysis. Because of the complexity of ecosystems, they may represent a greater challenge, even in longstanding and well-funded programmes. Technical and financial constraints to assessment By definition, a watershed approach implies dealing with large areas and complex issues that are intractable in a narrow and strictly technical framework, for financial as well as technical reasons. A watershed programme in the Fouta Djallon highlands in Guinea was mentioned which first included reference watersheds for purposes of evaluating initiatives in pilot watersheds. The reference watersheds were soon dropped, and impact monitoring was found difficult for lack of baseline data. In many cases, measurable downstream impacts cannot realistically be expected given the small area covered by project interventions relative to the total watershed area. Nevertheless, such downstream impacts are often mentioned as a justification for upstream rural development.41 Such limitations are, at least in part, a problem of governance and institutional arrangements, related to the distribution of benefits and costs among stakeholders. Increasing emphasis on participatory approaches in monitoring, assessment, and decision-making reflects not only financial constraints, but also the limits of technical knowledge for solving complex problems, and the need to make value judgements. It demonstrates the value of local knowledge that stakeholders bring to the process. An important role of researchers and organizations is in working in partnership with and providing technical and financial support for community-based efforts. As pointed out in background paper 3, this approach can have high up-front costs but is likely to have longer lasting benefits and may be more cost-effective. Variability, uncertainty and myths about land­water linkages Due to the complexity of landscape processes and the long time lag between cause and effect, uncertainty is inherent in any scientific findings and assumptions about land­water interactions. This uncertainty has given rise to a number of overgeneralizations, or myths, regarding land­ water interactions (see discussion paper 1 and background paper 1). Such overgeneralizations may lead to negative impacts, when they are used to justify policies and actions and to allocate funds. This can be illustrated in a number of the case studies. For example, the general statement that "all sediment is a pollutant" that underlies attempts to reduce sediment in Colorado, USA, has resulted instead in the incision of stream banks.42 Another common generalization is that upstream deforestation causes downstream flooding and sedimentation in large-scale basins (see Box 4 regarding assumed links between deforestation in the Himalayas and flooding, in the lower part of the Ganges-Brahmaputra basin).
Conacher, Intervention 43 Facon, Intervention 14 42 Kimsey, Intervention 9.
The singling out of a particular factor, from complex ranges of multiple causes, may be used to support institutional interests and to blame or scapegoat poor and minority populations often found in marginal upland areas. In the Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bangladesh, for example, shifting cultivators have been regarded as the main initiators of erosion. However, shifting cultivation, which is only practised on four to six percent of the area, is in decline because it is no longer regarded as sustainable as a result of diminished productivity. Other factors contributing to erosion include the monsoon climate, steep slopes, extensive deforestation, and increasing land pressure from in-migration.43 This kind of biased selection of key impacts may also be used to justify more popular structural projects that do not work, and to avoid less popular measures, such as licensing and user fees. Examples of ineffective structural projects include the construction of siltation dams for addressing problems of groundwater depletion, and improving the efficiency of water use in irrigation, which often simply leads to the increase of irrigated areas and accelerates water depletion.44 In addition to generalizations about biophysical causes, there are those held about stakeholders, for instance whether millions of small farmers should be regarded as "bottlenecks" in watershed management which "need to be educated in management".45 Though seemingly harmless, such.
BOX 6: ZIMBABWE: THE CAUSES OF SEDIMENTATION46 An experience from south-eastern Zimbabwe was described regarding the myth that `poor agricultural practices in the headwaters are leading to increased siltation in reservoirs.' The large sugar estates of the lowlands are major agribusiness users of water in Zimbabwe, and rely on an extensive series of mid-catchment storage dams that all face problems of sedimentation. Often, the increased sediment is blamed on poor local farming practices, including deforestation and overgrazing by the `indigenous,' `subsistence' farmers of land in the headwaters. Following the devastating drought of the early 1990s, some of the sugar estates started outreach programmes to work with the farmers in the headwaters to `improve' their land management. By the late 1990s, those involved in the outreach programme were reporting positive results: the suspended solids entering their dams were decreasing dramatically. Yet, to a disinterested observer it seemed highly unlikely that changes in how the headwaters were managed could have been responsible for these dramatic falls in sediment load. The outreach programme was tiny, and the catchment area large. Research also revealed a 10-year cyclical pattern of above and below `average' rainfall, possibly related to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The 1980s, which were capped by a drought, had been the driest on record. The combination of research and local farmers' perspectives allows development of an alternative narrative to that of the sugar cane farmers. This suggests that during the long dry years, water levels drop, shrubs and grass die, and livestock (before dying) exacerbates the situation by eating everything available, turning the area into a desert. During this period, sediment levels generally increase and can erode easily, as what rain does come is unmitigated by vegetation. In particular, large storm events at the end of the dry period can move huge quantities of `stored' soil. However, once a wetter period is entered, browse and crop cover quickly returns, aided by low livestock numbers, and erosion more or less ceases ­ until the next dry cycle. Just as the account of sugar cane farmers, the above is a narrative rather than a scientifically proven account. Proof, in this case, would require monitoring sediment loads and other key parameters for a full 20-year cycle. However, it corresponds with what is known of erosion from other arid and semi-arid regions. Photographs of the study site in the 1990s show a bare expanse of red earth, in no way comparable to the lush `humid' vegetation seen since 1994. Sediment measured leaving a small headwater catchment, where there had been no outreach programme and where subsistence agriculture was being practised, never exceeded 5 t/ha ­ far below the 70-100 t/ha reported from so many plot-based experiments.
Hopkins, Intervention 45 Facon, Intervention 49.
Stevens, Intervention 53 Moriarty, Intervention 26.
metaphors play powerful roles in shaping policy and programmes. It may also be convenient for experts to base their advice on unverifiable assumptions. The uncertainty inherent in findings and assumptions about land­water interactions needs to be made very explicit to avoid the emergence of new myths. For example, in the Zimbabwe case (Box 6), the explanation that links sediment reduction to 20-year climatic cycles cannot be proven without conducting a long-term study and therefore includes a degree of uncertainty, but it is consistent with available information. One conclusion that can be drawn from the Zimbabwe case study is that both climatic fluctuation and land­use changes influence erosion rate and sediment delivery, though little is known about relationships between the natural and anthropogenic factors responsible for sediment redistribution within river basins. Another conclusion that can be drawn from it is that assumptions about land­water interactions need be continuously questioned and revised in light of new information. Given that watershed problems are often tied to cycles much longer than 20 years and to less frequent extreme events, myths help to form perception of long-term relationships that are otherwise difficult to perceive. Myths can be an impediment to the formulation of sound policies with regard to land­ water relationships when decisions and institutional commitments are based on them, as this reduces flexibility and the capacity for adaptive responses. One participant expressed concern about the danger that the concept of "forest myths" could be interpreted to imply that conservation and reforestation are not significant to the stabilization of watersheds.47 Decisionmakers expect to be given explicit advice as to policy options and actions that can be taken. The message that "it depends" may instead lead to confusion and open the door to greater arbitrariness. It was suggested that it is the role of scientists to seek out and expose pseudo-science myths upon which much of current land and water management policy is based, and which continue to lead to misallocation of development funds on projects with unachievable objectives.48 They also have a responsibility not to oversell explanations when informing policymakers, though their message may be used in unintended ways.49.
PART II: THE LIFESCAPE PERSPECTIVE.
A defining characteristic of watershed management is that resulting costs and benefits are divided between upstream and downstream people, and in time, between the present and the future. This makes it difficult to assess the benefits and costs, which is necessary to achieve an equitable sharing among upstream and downstream stakeholders, creating incentives to expand beneficial land uses and discourage negative ones at a watershed scale. It implies the need to explore and develop new economic and regulatory instruments as well as social and institutional arrangements for watershed management. With respect to typology, there was some discussion of the term "watershed management" itself, and whether or not it is useful to distinguish it from "watershed development". However, following clarification, there was no disagreement that the term watershed management pertains.
Echavarría, Intervention 50 Calder, Intervention 68.
Hafner, Intervention 56.
to socio-economic as well as biophysical concerns and is therefore inclusive of livelihood concerns,50 at least in theory if not always in practice. Session 3: Valuing land­water linkages: assessment of benefits and costs Direct and indirect water use values affected by land use The most significant use values of water that may be affected by upstream land uses are those associated with agriculture, production of hydroelectricity, and domestic uses in urban areas. Other use values may include forestry, aquaculture and recreation. In addition, indirect uses include flood control, sediment retention, water quality, transport, flow regulation, fishing, and climate stabilization. Consumptive uses, which are primarily associated with agricultural, domestic and some industrial uses, are those that affect water quantity and quality because they make it unavailable to others.51 For example, irrigation, which consumes water, may be of greater concern to downstream stakeholders than hydroelectric production, which uses the flow of water without consuming it. Consumption does not always have negative economic impacts. In one case, use of water for rice paddies in Japan was found to have significant downstream benefits of flood control as well as groundwater recharge, soil erosion control, and preservation of the landscape and biodiversity (see Box 7). Aquatic resources and riparian areas may also have significant non-use values, as reservoirs of biodiversity.
BOX 7: THE BENEFITS OF RICE PRODUCTION IN JAPAN52 Economic benefits of rice production in Japan include: · Flood prevention: total water storage capacity of paddy fields in Japan is estimated at around 4.4 billion m3, which is much higher than the total storage capacity of dams constructed for flood control. Peak runoff from paddy field areas is 3 times less than peak runoff from 75 percent urbanized areas. Several municipalities therefore subsidize paddy production. This subsidy amounts to between 20 and 80 percent of the gross income from rice production. Total benefit from paddy fields for flood prevention is equivalent to constructing flood control dams worth 1.95 trillion yen per year. Groundwater recharge: Groundwater recharge is estimated at 160 million m3 per day in w h o l e Japan. This supports pumping for domestic and industrial use. The benefit of groundwater recharge based on the construction of the equivalent reservoirs is estimated at 800 billion yen per year. Soil erosion control: 40 percent of paddy fields are terraced sloped land. Total benefit assessed by the construction cost of soil sedimentation dams is estimated to be about 40 billion yen per year. Preservation of landscape and biodiversity: willingness to pay in Nara Prefecture for the preservation of paddy fields is estimated at about twice the value of gross production of paddy rice (at Japanese prices). Willingness to pay of the paddy fields in mountainous areas was 74 percent and 91 percent higher than those in flat areas and suburbs, respectively.
de Graaff, Intervention 33; Stevens, Intervention 53 Echavarría, Background Paper 4 52 Facon, Intervention 14.
Valuation of benefits and costs for downstream users Assessment of costs and benefits of a particular land use is more straightforward when links between causes and effects are well understood, which, in a watershed context, is often not the case. Given this uncertainty, it is important to recognize that results represent best judgement, based on what information is obtainable, and that they only represent a limited period of time. Also, that they only represent factors considered as costs and benefits in the analysis. Although non-monetary costs and benefits, as well at those that only become evident over long periods of time are usually not considered in this type of analysis because of methodological difficulties, it is not always necessary to include these to justify watershed protection. In the Loukkos project (see Box 8) for example, streambank erosion and landslides that may be influenced by land use were not considered, which suggests that the estimated high rate of return is a conservative one. Policy and social ethics may make it necessary to include less tangible and less certain costs and benefits.53 The assessment requires estimation and comparison of net downstream benefits, with and without a particular intervention, for which two examples are provided in background paper 5 (see Boxes 8 and 9).54 The key factors considered will depend on the particular costs and benefits of concern, and the environmental changes they are associated with. For example, if the concern is water supply, the key factor will be changes in dry-season flow. Estimation of this change can then be used to estimate changes in yield of irrigated crops or potential reduction of reservoir levels and hydroelectric generating capacity. If the concern is flood control, the key factor will be changes in peak flow. Changes in the flow regime then need to be linked to changes in land use. For example, disturbances from fires, cyclones, and selective logging will affect flow regimes differently from conversion to agriculture.55 Changes in sedimentation rates can have positive or negative economic impacts, depending on where the sediment is deposited. For example, sediment deposited in agricultural areas may be beneficial. When it is deposited behind dams, it may decrease the life of the dam, which may be irreplaceable because of limited availability of new sites, and reduced hydroelectric generating capacity.56 A methodology suggested for estimating land use related changes in biomass production, stream flow and downstream sedimentation, and also as a way to make monitoring more manageable, is to subdivide the watershed in hydrological subunits, based on agro-climatic conditions. It can then be further divided into upper, lower and middle parts based on altitude and physical characteristics. This information can then be combined with land use and technology data to calculate water balances for different scenarios and time periods, and assess erosion, sedimentation and production changes.57 Another methodology suggested, now being tested on the Zambezi river, was to develop a process model emphasizing rates of reproduction of renewable resources, that describes changes in the system. Economic analysis can then be applied to a given state in the system.58 One case study described an economic valuation of impacts of irrigation on aquatic resources was based on a household survey regarding use of aquatic resources, the value of the catches, and how these values were affected.59.
Appelgren, Intervention 54 de Graaff, Background Paper 5 55 de Graaff, Background Paper 5 56 de Graaff, Background Paper 5.
de Graaff, Background Paper 5 van Wesenbeeck and Albersen, Intervention 46 59 Lorenzen, Intervention 20.
BOX 8: ECONOMIC EVALUATION OF THE LOUKKOS WATERSHED PROJECT IN NORTHERN MOROCCO60 The Loukkos river basin (1 820 km2) provides stream flow for the Oued El Makhazine reservoir, which provides irrigation water for 25 200 ha, hydroelectric power, water supply and flood control. About half of the watershed area shows signs of severe erosion. Conservation measures implemented by the Loukkos Watershed Project included: reforestation, pasture management, olive and fruit tree plantations, channel stabilization, gully control and road construction. Based on the level of sedimentation in the reservoir, and estimated annual soil loss, the sediment delivery ratio was estimated to be 39 percent. Assumptions were made about the extent to which vegetation would reduce sedimentation, which provided a basis for estimating the extent to which irrigated crop losses would be reduced. Also included in the analysis were benefits from olive and fruit production. Based on these benefits, it was found that the project would have an internal rate of return of 15.9 percent and would have a net present value of US$ 18.8 million. Not included were the benefits of reduced soil nutrient losses, and increased productivity of animals and wood.
BOX 9: ECONOMIC EVALUATION OF KONTO RIVER WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES IN EAST JAVA, INDONEDIA61 The Upper Konto River watershed area (232 km2) drains into the Selorejo reservoir, which provides hydroelectricity and irrigation water benefits for 5 700 ha downstream. Conservation measures implemented by a watershed development project to counteract land degradation included: reforestation, coffee rejuvenation, terracing, gully control, and grass planting. An evaluation of the costs and benefits of project activities was based on an assessment of the effects of increased vegetation cover and higher water infiltration which could potentially increase minimum dry season flows as well as reduce wet season flows. A method similar to the above (see Box 8) was used to estimate soil conservation related benefits. To estimate benefits of stream flow changes, it was necessary to also estimate evapotranspiration, infiltration, and direct runoff for each type of land use, which included: natural forest, open forest, shrub, coffee, poorly and well terraced rainfed land, irrigated land and built-up areas. This runoff was apportioned to dry and wet season, and estimates were made of how this would be affected by land use changes. Estimates suggested that dry season flows would have a minimal increase but that the decrease in wet season flows, though small, would reduce annual flood damage by 510 percent. This last estimate was based on levels of damage associated with past flood patterns. Together, the flood control and sedimentation related benefits were comparable to onsite benefits of wood and coffee production.
Session 4: Sharing benefits and costs from land­water linkages The results of economic valuation can be used to identify existing financial incentives that various stakeholders have for implementing conservation measures. This information can improve the learning and negotiation among stakeholders with a view to developing more effective and equitable ways of reducing the costs and sharing the benefits of land use impacts on water resources. Development of new incentives requires consideration of institutional, regulatory and economic issues. Watersheds provide a frame of reference for considering all of these issues in a broader context, and for building awareness of upstream-downstream relationships among stakeholders. The following sub-sections identify various types of mechanisms and instruments, ways that they have been applied, and associated constraints, that need to be considered when selecting an approach that is appropriate for a particular context.
de Graaff, Background Paper 5 de Graaff, Background Paper 5.
Benefit-sharing mechanisms for linking upstream and downstream users Mechanisms and instruments for linking upstream and downstream users to share the benefits and reduce the costs of watershed management include a broad range of approaches: regulatory instruments, economic instruments, mechanisms to increase market access, educational and awareness-building measures, the development of organizational arrangements, and participatory approaches. Also mentioned were approaches rooted in local knowledge and customs. These measures rely on the existence of effective and appropriate biophysical and structural responses for mitigating problems of watershed degradation. Most often, different instruments are used in combination. Economic instruments generally involve various forms of transfer of payments between downstream and upstream stakeholders, but may also include transfers between land users and society at large, such as government subsidies that influence the magnitude of land use or that are aimed at economic development of marginal upper basin areas.62 Examples of specific economic instruments presented and discussed in the workshop include: water pricing and allocation reform through the establishment of user fees and tradable water entitlements or pollution permits; removal or correction of subsidies; cost sharing arrangements to cover costs of works and ongoing operations and maintenance, in which the contributions of downstream beneficiaries are made through state and federal governments;63 and improvement of market access for upstream farmers. One way to do this is through negotiating agreements with businesses to purchase from farmers who participate in development and implementation of management plans, another way is through labelling of products from these farms. Many initiatives have not been in place long enough to evaluate their effectiveness for actual conservation but a number of initiatives appear promising at least from the standpoint of engaging stakeholders and gaining support and cooperation. Some examples that have had promising results are:.
· A water tax-scheme in Baden Württemberg Germany, in which proceeds of a water use tax.
finance compensation payments for restrictions on fertilizer use in water protection zones;64.
· A property tax rebate of up to 80 percent for preparation and implementation of a forest.
management plan in the New York City watershed;.
· Purchase of development rights or conservation easements on particular tracts of land, also.
in the New York City watershed;.
· Sale of downstream fish products to upstream farmers at a discount (see Box 10); · Establishment of a fund for upstream conservation activities financed through downstream.
user fees, as is seen in the Cauca Valley in Colombia65 and in Quito, Ecuador (Box 11);66 Use of environmental criteria for the allocation of a portion of sales tax revenue ­ in the state of Paraná, Brazil, part of revenue from a sales tax is allocated to municipalities in watersheds upstream of water sources for public drinking water systems, to increase the resources available for environmental protection and improve water quality.67 Other instruments that could be categorized as economic, even if non-monetary, are traditional incentive systems within communities. For example, in Konso, a semi-arid area in southwestern.
Kiersch, Discussion Paper 2 Feehan, Case Study 22 64 Kiersch, Discussion Paper 2.
Echavarría, Background Paper 4 Echavarría, Case Study 30 67 Echavarría, Background Paper 4.
Ethiopia, a man has to build a terrace before he is allowed to marry, which seems to provide the required incentive. This area has a high population density and intense land pressure but less visible e r o s i o n than a nearby area to the north. 70 Regulatory instruments consist of a wide range of restrictions that may be applied to the use of land and water resources, from limitations on pesticide and fertilizer use to the establishment o f zones in which some land use p r a c t i c e s are allowed and others forbidden. Regulations are often difficult to implement because of the potential economic losses to resource users, who may have to be compensated, depending o n the individual circumstances. However, economic incentives are not necessarily a substitute for regulations but are sometimes a complement. For example, for tradable permits to work, a regulatory cap on pollutant emissions o r resource extraction is required. Participation in market measures may a l s o be motivated by the threat of r e g u l a t i o n , and capacity to enforce agreements is also necessary for them to work effectively.
BOX 10: ENVIRONMENTAL TRANSFER PAYMENTS IN ZAMBOANGA PROVINCE, MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES68 In a region where upstream farmers had been applying Sloping Agricultural Land Technology (SALT) and other soil and water conservation methods for approximately 8 years, the quality and quantity of fish stocks downstream, which had been nearly depleted, rose s i g n i f i c a n t l y. The fishermen observed increased growth of plants in the water and lower siltation levels. A forester from the upstream site brought the farmers' association and the fishermen's association together and they worked out an agreement: in recognition of the beneficial impact of upstream land management regimes which had reduced erosion, fishermen sell their fish to members of the upstream organization at a discount (75-80 percent of market price approximately). This agreement has been in operation s i n c e 1997 and the two associations have held quarterly meetings since, always supported by the project staff.
BOX 11: WATERSHED PROTECTION FUND TO PRESERVE DRINKING WATER IN QUITO, ECUADOR69 A case study on the Water and Watershed Protection Fund (FONAG) as a mechanism for the conservation of the Cayambe-Coca and Antisana nature reserves i n Ecuador describes a proposed financing m e c h a n i s m for water and watershed protection activities in the upper watersheds of the city of Quito, Ecuador. Local (e.g. the water supply company) and international sources will be contributing to the fund. A board that consists of representatives of the local water and electricity companies, water users, regional and l o c a l government, communities, and nongovernmental organizations will govern the fund. It will finance conservation activities with the aim of ensuring a clean, dependable water supply.
Implementation of economic and regulatory measures tends to be more effective when they are part of broader approaches that include education and awareness building activities. Strong community interest and participation makes it feasible for measures to be implemented over large upper-watershed areas, which may not be possible under a centralized command and control approach. This in turn depends on the existence of appropriate organizational arrangements that provide opportunities to participate. An example of education and awareness building approaches is found in case of the New York City watershed where farm audits are conducted and pollution sources are identified with farmer participation, in conjunction with offering economic incentives to reduce pollution.71 A.
Agostini, Intervention 52 Echavarría, Case Study 30.
Hopkins, Intervention 45 Kiersch, Discussion Paper 2.
participatory approach, involving farmers in central western Brazil, made it possible to extend the development of micro-dams, built to contain polluted runoff and promote recharge of water tables, to cover an entire micro-basin.72 Participation often takes place through watershed associations, developed to reduce transaction costs in stakeholder negotiations. An important consideration is that there are different interests at different scales ­ reflecting these differences in organizational arrangements can provide greater opportunities for public participation. At larger scales, participation is a challenge because it is more difficult to engage all concerned people in all of the affected communities. At these scales, there is a greater role of regional and national governments. Development of self-help groups below the village level can provide a foundation for watershed associations that encompass multiple villages73 and also ensure that these local interests are represented in negotiations over large-scale problems. Further important elements of organizational arrangements are the decision-making autonomy of watershed associations and transparency in how money is managed and spent. This is seen in the example of the Cauca Valley of Colombia, where large-scale downstream agricultural users pay a user fee to water user associations that work as private foundations in implementing watershed conservation projects. The local authority oversees the technical aspects, works with these organizations and even helps in the payment process, but the resources are managed independently by each organization.74 Ultimately, the different types of instruments are best seen as elements of integrated approaches, including crop management, agricultural and crop pricing policy, macro-policy measures, and structural change,75 with the objectives of poverty alleviation and improvement of upstream living conditions in ways that are consistent with watershed protection. Integrated regional and basin-wide approaches often evolve from a narrow to a broad focus, as is seen in the examples of Laguna Lake and the Agno Basin (see Box 12), which illustrate the evolution of a mandate from management of a water body to its whole catchment area with the involvement of upstream and downstream users. These examples also demonstrate that stakeholders can be brought together around a shared vision and strategic plan, that basin-wide planning can foster development that is more equitable between upstream and downstream users, and that coordination among government agencies is important. An example from India (see Box 13) illustrates the process of scaling up, from local ad hoc to national and intersectoral initiatives with broad-based collaboration, and suggests that NGOs can play an important role in this process. At the largest scales, in international river basins, it becomes necessary for agreements to be reached among all riparian states. Because of the difficulties of linking causes and effects at these scales, conflicts and concerns are generally over water allocation issues. For example, in the Niger basin, there is concern with water diversion for irrigation as development proceeds in the upstream riparian states. Basin-wide planning may include joint responses to drought and climate change. Lacking a centralized authority, river basin negotiations tend to become the basis for general economic cooperation that transcends water resources development. Basin-.
Cordoval de Barros, Case Study 25 Lorenzen, Intervention 20.
Echavarría, Intervention 50 Appelgren, Intervention 6.
BOX 12: THE EVOLUTION OF INTEGRATED BASIN-WIDE APPROACHES IN THE PHILIPPINES LAGUNA LAKE AND THE AGNO BASIN76 After several initiatives to create regional and basin-wide planning agencies had failed, the Philippine government took a renewed interest in building the capacity of the Laguna Lake Development Authority (LLDA), and the Agno Basin Development Commission (ARBDC). Laguna Lake is the major water source for Metro Manila. LLDA was given regulatory powers related to use of the lake and regional development activities, developed a master plan containing a vision and strategies for achieving it, and adopted a multi-use policy, shifting from a focus on fisheries promotion to environmental protection and pollution control at the watershed level. It also implemented a user fee system, encourages multi-sector involvement to stop degradation of 21 river systems draining into Laguna lake, and commissions relevant studies and projects. The ARBDC is not an authority but relies instead on the commitment and participation of related agencies, and provides leadership for a programme of basin-wide strategic planning and management. In the course of its activities, it developed a comprehensive master plan that was integrated into local and regional plans and investment programmes. Related activities include coordination of the implementation of a development programme and projects, review and r e c o m m e n d a t i o n of project proposals, identifying and proposing policy improvements, coordination of monitoring, soil erosion prevention and siltation mitigation activities, flood control, and establishment of an information system.
w i d e hydrologic monitoring and forecasting systems could provide better support for integrated management of resources.77 Constraints to the implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms.
BOX 13: INDIA: THE ROLE OF NGOS IN THE PROCESS OF SCALING-UP Watershed management efforts in India began as ad hoc soil and water conservation measures over two decades ago but have evolved into a national level integrated inter-sectoral participatory approach w i t h substantial budgetary provisions for the rehabilitation and development of micro-watersheds. A key factor that influenced the change was the success of a few local initiatives taken by NGOs. Scaling up has taken place formally as a result of government funding to communities through NGOs f o r programme implementation, and informally, through cross-learning between NGOs and village c o m m u n i t i e s . NGOs have therefore played a significant role in the process through programme implementation and institutional capacity building.
A number of constraints to the mechanisms discussed above are often encountered in the implementation phase. These range from the need to find a compromise among conflicting interests over the distribution of their costs and benefits, to the institutional challenges and up-front costs of engaging stakeholders in the initial planning phases; weak or nonexistent property rights that can provide some assurance to people that they will reap future benefits; poverty; and lack of perception that there is a problem to begin with. Conflicting interests are often found between objectives, which may also be related to jurisdictional boundaries. At the most general level, there is often a conflict between the objectives of sustaining livelihoods in the short term, and protection of resources. The Working for Water programme in South Africa, which provides training and employment as part of efforts to eradicate the introduction of exotic vegetation that consumes large amounts of water, represents one attempt to reconcile these objectives.78 An ideal mechanism is one that harmonizes conflicting.
Facon, Intervention 57 El-Khodari, Intervention 10 78 Calder, Intervention 42.
objectives and provides ample clean water to all users, in which the role of the government is to provide regulatory frameworks in which private enterprise profits from improving delivery and quality of water, to protect human and environmental health, and to harmonize interests. In the real world, governments often fail to fulfil these basic obligations, even in disaster situations, and mechanisms are often manipulated to the advantage of the more powerful interests.79 Inherent in various mechanisms, are different ways of distributing costs and benefits, not only between upstream and downstream users, but also within communities, where burdens may fall disproportionately on parts of the population, such as women or minority groups. For example, closing of common forest and grazing areas to allow for regeneration may disproportionately affect landless and pastoralist households, or may reduce women's access to firewood and fodder.80 Acceptance of a particular arrangement of costs and benefits depends on whether they are regarded as fair. Equally important is the designation of an acceptable body to implement and to oversee implementation.81 It is therefore important to make clear who will benefit by and who will pay for potential interventions. A particular equity concern related to the use of economic instruments is that transfer payments to upstream land users to implement conservation practices may reverse the "polluter pays" principle. This m a y make upstream farming more a t t r a c t i v e rather than encourage a l t e r n a t i v e livelihood strategies.82 In principle, upstream users should accept c o s t sharing for pollution they are responsible for, and it was recommended that subsidies for adopting infrastructure a n d management practices be accompanied by a tax on pollutants in the future.83 However, it was also recognized that incomes are lower in rural areas, which may be related to other kinds of e q u i t y problems. French agricultural policies illustrate one way this problem has been addressed (see Box 14).
BOX 14: MULTIPLE FUNCTIONS IN FRENCH AGRICULTURE84 In France, agriculture is considered to have multiple functions and is supported and regulated by policies and regulations found across several political and administrative levels. In return for providing food s e c u r i t y and for maintaining landscapes and e n v i r o n m e n ta l quality, farmers expect a decent income. Consumers are increasingly willing to pay for this directly or as taxpayers. A recently created instrument in France provides financial incentives for adoption of best practices and for producing the public good of maintaining the landscape, and is also supplemented by water fees and eco-taxes. Direct benefit sharing takes place through quality or provenance labelling, tourism, and use of water fees t o assist upstream users in implementing environmental regulations. In contrast, previous policies to reduce nitrate pollution by the livestock i n d u s t r y were found to be ineffective because incentives had not been accompanied by a sanction on pollution.
Additional constraints to the implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms are weak or non-existent property rights, and lack of institutional capacity for collective action, which are both necessary for watershed management because management practices are above the individual farm level, and benefits tend to be only in the long-term. Thus they can help to address issues of spatial and temporal scale. However, the relationships are not always simple because land­titling programmes may decrease the security of those who lack the education and connections needed to gain a formal title. There is also evidence that customary tenure arrangements can provide enough security for people to invest, although they are often not recognized by government. In Southern Mindanao, land tenure was found to be a key factor in.
Kehrig, Intervention 55 Meinzen-Dick, Intervention 37 81 Davidson, Intervention 16.
Agostini, Intervention 52 Facon, Intervention 49 84 Facon, Intervention 49.
the adoption of soil conservation technologies (see Box 15). Collective action has been found to emerge for various reasons. For example, people may participate as a way to establish good relations or because it is "the right thing to do."85.
BOX 15: PHILIPPINES: THE ROLE OF TENURE IN THE.
ADOPTION OF SOIL CONSERVATION PRACTICES86.
The process of engaging stakeholders is u l t i m a t e l y a problem of governance. Ensuring that local interests are represented and considered at the larger scales is a way t o build capacity for collective action. C o n s t r a i n t s to the scaling-up process, revealed in evaluations and consultations between government agencies, NGOs and donors, include: inadequate and ineffective participation of the watershed community; insufficient integration of gender and equity concerns; lack of inter-departmental coordination; inadequate emphasis on building the capacity of staff and community members; and lack of monitoring mechanisms. Also, needs of women and resource-poor groups are easily overlooked in implementation unless they are involved in the planning process. A phased implementation was recommended, with more emphasis on community organization in the first phase, and implementation of physical works in the second.87 The most obvious constraint is funding, which in some cases is restricted to particular uses that fail to address the most urgent problems. For example, if sedimentation problems due to unstable slopes in danger of landslides and riverbank erosion call for structural measures, restriction of funding for small-scale participatory approaches will leave the most urgent problems unaddressed.88 At the household level, poverty often constrains the adoption of options that require investment for long-term benefits. This implies the need to focus on measures which have quick and direct benefit to the local population. Criteria for success in implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms A number of comments addressed the set of criteria for success in implementation proposed in discussion paper.
1. "The impact of upstream land use on downstream water use is well understood." This is not necessarily so at the beginning of a programme, because groups tend to organize around priority issues and opportunities. However, to reach agreement, there needs to be a way to determine costs and benefits as they are initially perceived by stakeholders, which may change as understanding is increased. Costs and benefits may also change depending on the portfolio of activities chosen and on external conditions,89 as was seen in the example from Zamboanga Province in Mindanao, Philippines, where fish stocks rose approximately eight years after upstream farmers began to adopt soil conservation methods. The upstream farmers association and the fishermen's association were then able to work out an agreement.
Meinzen-Dick, Intervention 76 Hopkins, Intervention 45 87 Pangare, Intervention 66.
In Southern Mindanao in the Philippines, farmer a d o p t i o n of soil conservation technologies (Sloping Agricultural Land Technology ­ SALT) was low, but there was a higher rate of adoption a m o n g landowners than among tenants. Constraints to the adoption of SALT were that f a r m e r s were required to give a significant amount of land to tree crops or hedgerows, which also required an increase in labour. Even when grants were provided, agroforestry farmers failed to maintain the hedgerows. It is also unlikely t h a t loss in area cultivated would be c o m p e n s a t e d by higher yields though there m i g h t be financial benefit after 3-5 years. Subsidies are therefore needed if this is to be used as a strategy for reversing land degradation.
Facon, Intervention 14 Dixon, Intervention 48.
in which fish were sold at a discount to members of the upstream farmers organization (Box 10).90 This criterion might be modified then to state that "There is some common understanding and agreement among stakeholders regarding the impacts of upstream land use on downstream water use, as well as awareness of uncertainty.".
"The impact of land use on water resources clearly dominate over natural impacts or other anthropogenic impacts" This criteria could be considered a part of criterion 1.91.
"The groups of upstream and downstream stakeholders are few and well-organized." This criterion was considered important. Based on overall discussions regarding the formation of watershed associations that can be composed of numerous stakeholders, it should be modified to state "The groups of upstream and downstream stakeholders are generally few and/or well-organized.".
"The economic impact of land use on downstream stakeholders can be quantified." Margins of error do not necessarily impede a satisfactory outcome, because payments just need to cover the extra effort not otherwise compensated for through on-site benefits, and those downstream will only be willing to pay for additional benefits received. Therefore it is not always necessary to know exact impacts.92 The criterion should be modified to say that impacts can be "approximately" quantified.
"The incentives to upstream and downstream resource users offered by the benefit-sharing instruments are high enough so that the users give preference to the instruments over alternative solutions to their problems." This appears superfluous because it is a standard criterion for any choice and does not seem to add to criteria for benefit-sharing.93.
"There is political commitment to establish upstream-downstream linkages." This may be necessary at larger scales. At smaller scales, at which there is a realistic chance of determining impacts, stakeholders can act and negotiate independently of policy frameworks. Outside assistance may still be important for providing information and training regarding physiographic and hydrological linkages, and support for negotiations. Even at this scale, changes in the legal and institutional environment may be necessary if there are obstacles to the implementation of transfer payments. This criterion might be modified to say "There is a commitment to establish upstream-downstream linkages, whether it is through contractual agreements or through policy frameworks, and some underlying technical basis for it.".
"There is a strong institutional and legal framework, including land tenure structure, which may allow for or hinder the implementation of benefit-sharing instruments." This is ambiguous. It was pointed out that, in Zamboanga, Philippines, (see Box 10) farmers had been granted tenure in exchange for land use conditions, and that it is therefore not clear why the fishermen compensated them. One possible explanation is problems in enforcement of tenure regulations, which would suggest that such benefits may compensate for lack of a strong institutional and legal framework. Further examples are needed to clarify this issue.
Agostini, Intervention 52 Agostini, Intervention 52.
Suggestions for additional criteria included: "There should be decision-making autonomy for those who pay and who benefit, and a transparent mechanism for deciding how the money is spent." This criterion was suggested based on experience in the Cauca Valley in Colombia, where large-scale downstream agricultural users pay a fee to water user associations that then implement watershed conservation projects. Resources are managed independently by each organization, although a local authority may oversee technical aspects.94 "Management interventions and also watershed associations should be appropriate to the scale of the river basin". The scale of the river basin is critical to the effectiveness and the penetration of management interventions. Meso-basins of 100-500 km2 within well-defined jurisdictions at the state or national level seem to be optimal.95 "Basin treaties should be acceptable to all riparians, for equitable use, protection and management of water resources in basins."96 This criterion appears to be fundamental to translate conservation and development programmes into negotiated, voluntary and self-enforcing agreements as well as for cooperation in inter-jurisdictional and transboundary watersheds.97 "Information about impacts, and their potential costs and benefits, needs to be communicated using common methods of expression." For example, the concept of agro-climatological zones is easily and widely understood, and would also allow for assessment and extrapolation of actual and potential land use and production, management capacity and environmental hazards.98.
Echavarría, Intervention 50 Appelgren, Intervention 54 96 El-Khodari, Intervention 10.
Appelgren, Intervention 27 Appelgren, Intervention 54.
Discussion papers.
Discussion paper 1 Land use impacts on water resources: a literature review.
Land use practices are assumed to have important impacts on both the availability and quality of water resources. These impacts can be both positive and negative. It is intuitively appealing that the benefits of improved land management, or the costs associated with negative impacts of inadequate land use on the water resources, might not only be felt by water users who cause them, but also by others who live downstream or ­ in the case of groundwater ­ make use of the affected groundwater resources. In order to assess these costs and benefits, it is important to get a clear picture, from a landscape perspective, of the extent that different land use practices affect hydrologic regime and water quality and at which watershed scale the impacts are of importance. The present paper proposes a typology of land use impacts on water resources, and attempts to evaluate the importance of each impact type in relation to spatial scale on the basis of a literature review.
IMPACTS OF LAND USE ON WATER RESOURCES.
In order to establish linkages between upstream land and downstream water users, it is important to have a clear picture of the possible impacts of land uses on both hydrologic regime (water availability) and water quality, and the scales at which these impacts are relevant. In the following sections, an attempt is made to categorise land use impacts on water resources, to analyse the main determining factors behind the impact, and to provide some examples from the literature. The review focuses on impacts from agricultural land use, as well as from grazing, forestry and fisheries, as these all fall under FAO's mandate. Other land uses, like mining and quarrying, urbanization and industrialization, which also have important impacts on the hydrologic regime, are not included in this review. Furthermore, the review focuses on the physical impacts on water resources. Impacts on living aquatic resources, e.g. on fish and other aquatic organisms, aquatic ecosystems and wetlands, are not discussed explicitly. It is an open question, however, whether and how these should be included in this typology.
Benjamin Kiersch, Land and Water Development Division Food and Agriculture Organization Rome, Italy.
Discussion paper 1 ­ Land use impacts on water resources: a literature review.
It is difficult to arrive at universally valid statements about land use impacts on water resources for several reasons. The impacts of land use on water resources depend on a host of natural and socio-economic factors. Natural factors include climate, topography and soil structure. Socioeconomic factors include economic ability and awareness of the farmers, management practices, and the development of infrastructure, e.g. roads. Furthermore, the impacts of agricultural land use may be difficult to distinguish from natural or other human impacts, such as the impact of agricultural runoff versus rural sewage systems on degradation of surface water and groundwater.
LAND USE IMPACTS ON HYDROLOGIC REGIME.
With regard to the hydrologic regime, impacts on surface water resources and groundwater resources can be distinguished. Impacts of land use practices on surface water can be divided into (i) impacts on the overall water availability or the mean annual runoff, and (ii) impacts on the seasonal distribution of water availability. With regard to the latter, impacts on peak flows and impacts on dry season flows are of importance. With regard to groundwater, the effect of the land use on groundwater recharge has to be examined. Mean surface runoff The impact of land use on the mean runoff is a function of many variables, the most important being the water regime of the plant cover in terms of evapotranspiration (ET), the ability of the soil to hold water (infiltration capacity), and the ability of the plant cover to intercept moisture. A change of land cover from lower to higher ET will lead to a decrease in annual stream flow. From a review of 94 catchment experiments, Bosch and Hewlett (1982) concluded that the establishment of forest cover on sparsely vegetated land decreases water yield. Coniferous forest, deciduous hardwood, brush and grass cover have (in that order) a decreasing influence on water yield of the source areas in which the covers are manipulated. Conversely, a change from higher-ET plants to lower-ET plants will increase the mean surface runoff: reduction in forest cover increases water yield (Bosch and Hewlett, 1982; Calder, 1992). The impact, however, depends very much of the management practices and the alternative land uses. Careful, selective harvesting of timber has no or little effect on stream flow. Stream flow after maturation of the new plant cover may be higher, the same or lower than original value, depending on vegetation (Bruijnzeel, 1990). An exception to this rule are cloud forests, which can intercept more moisture (fog drip) than consumption by ET (Bosch and Hewlett, 1982), and very old forests, which, depending on the species, may consume less water than the vegetation that establishes itself after clear-cutting (Calder, 1998). Stream flow gains decline over time with establishment of new plant cover, but time scales can vary greatly. In humid warm areas, the effect of clear-cutting is shorter lived than in less humid areas, due to rapid regrowth of vegetation (Falkenmark and Chapman, 1989). Increasing water yield from changing plant cover does not necessarily increase water availability downstream. Stream flow might decrease because of other factors, e.g. water consumption by riparian vegetation or through transmission losses (channel infiltration) (Brooks et al., 1991).
Peak flow/floods Peak flows can increase as a result of a change in land use if the infiltration capacity of the soil is reduced, for example through soil compaction or erosion, or if drainage capacity is increased. Peak flow may increase after trees are cut down (Bruijnzeel, 1990). Relative increases in storm flow after tree removal are smallest for large events and largest for small events. As the amount of precipitation increases, influence on storm flow of soil and plant cover diminishes (Bruijnzeel, 1990; Brooks et al., 1989). An increase of peak flows may also result from the building of roads and infrastructure. Studies in the north-western USA have shown that the construction of forest roads can intensify peak runoff from forested areas significantly (La Marche and Lettenmaier, 1998; Bowling and Lettenmaier, 1997). Consolidation of smaller plots to large fields can lead to higher runoff rates, due to drainage systems and asphalt access roads (Falkenmark and Chapin, 1989). Conversely, peak flows may decrease as a result of an increased soil infiltration capacity. In larger basins, effects of land use practices on peak flow are offset due to time lag between different tributaries, different land use and variations in rainfall (Bruijnzeel, 1990) In larger watersheds, this de-synchronisation effect can lead to a reduction in peak discharge, although overall storm flow increases due to land use changes in individual subwatersheds (Brooks et al., 1991). Base flow/dry season flow The effect of land use change on dry-season flow depends on competing processes, most notably changes in ET and infiltration capacity. The net impact is likely to be highly site specific (Calder, 1998). In tropical areas, afforestation can lead to decreased dry-season flows due to increased evapotranspiration. In the Mae Thang watershed (Thailand), afforestation programmes led to water shortages downstream, which resulted in a seasonal closure of a water treatment plant and lower availability for irrigation (Chomitz and Kumari, 1996). Similarly, in the Fiji Islands, large-scale pine afforestation (60 000 ha) in watersheds previously covered by grassland led to reductions in dry-season flow of 50-60 percent, putting the operation of a hydro-electric plant and drinking water supply at risk (FAO, 1987). Most experimental evidence in rainfall-dominated regimes suggests that forest removal (or change from high-water-use plants to low-water-use plants) increases dry season flows (Brooks et al., 1991). In contrast, dry-season flows from deforested land may decrease if the soil infiltration capacity is reduced, e.g. through use of heavy machinery (Bruijnzeel, 1990). Low flow resulting from extended dry periods or droughts may not be substantially altered by changes in vegetative cover (Brooks et al., 1991). Groundwater recharge The groundwater recharge may be increased or decreased as a result of changing land use practices. The major driving forces are the ET of the vegetative cover and the infiltration capacity of the soil. Groundwater recharge is often linked with dry-season flows, as groundwater contributes much of the river discharge during the dry season.
The water table may rise as a result of decreased evapotranspiration, e.g. following logging or conversion of forest to grassland for grazing. Recharge may also increase due to an increased infiltration rate, e.g. through afforestation of degraded areas (Tejwani, 1993). In contrast, the water table may fall as a result of decreased soil infiltration, e.g. through nonconservation farming techniques and compaction (Tejwani, 1993). Also, heavy grazing may lead to reduced infiltration and groundwater recharge (Chomitz and Kumari, 1996). If the infiltration capacity is substantially reduced, this can lead to water shortages in dry seasons, even in regions where water is usually abundant, like in the case of shifting cultivation in Cherapunji province, India (FAO, 1999). Likewise, groundwater recharge can be reduced as a result of planting of deep rooting tree species, e.g. eucalyptus (Calder, 1998).
IMPACTS OF LAND USE ON WATER QUALITY.
Land use practices can have important impacts on water quality, which in turn may have negative or, in some cases, positive effects on downstream uses of water. Impacts include changes in sediment load and concentrations of nutrients, salts, metals and agrochemicals, the influx of pathogens, and a change in the temperature regime. Erosion and sediment load Forests are checkers of soil erosion. Protection is largely because of understorey vegetation and litter, and the stabilising effect of the root network. On steep slopes, the net stabilising effect of trees is usually positive. Vegetation cover can prevent the occurrence of shallow landslides (Bruijnzeel, 1990). However, large landslides on steep terrain are not influenced appreciably by vegetation cover. These large slides may contribute the bulk of the sediment, as for example in the middle hills of the Himalayas (Bruijnzeel and Bremmer, 1989). Afforestation does not necessarily decrease soil erosion. Splash erosion may increase substantially when litter is cleared from the forest floor (Bruijnzeel, 1990). The spectrum for the size of the drops that are formed by the canopy varies widely among different species, resulting in large differences in the potential of splash erosion (Calder, 1998). Deforestation may increase erosion. In Malaysia, streams from logged areas carry 8-17 times more sediment load than before logging (Falkenmark and Chapman, 1989). The actual soil loss, however, depends largely on the use to which the land is put after the trees have been cleared. Surface erosion from well-kept grassland, moderately grazed forests and soil-conserving agriculture are low to moderate (Bruijnzeel, 1990). Road construction may be a major cause for erosion during timber harvesting operations. In the USA, forest roads are estimated to account for 90 percent of the erosion caused by logging activities (Brooks et al., 1991; Bruijnzeel, 1990). Effects of erosion control measures on sediment yield will be most readily felt on-site. There is an inverse relation between basin size and sediment delivery ratio. In basins of several hundred km2, improvements may only be noticeable after a considerable time lag (decades), due to storage effects (Bruijnzeel, 1990). Downstream sediment yields cannot always be ascribed to the changing of upstream land use practices. Human impacts on sediment yield may be substantial in regions with stable geological.
conditions and low natural erosion rates. In regions with high rainfall rates, steep terrain, and high natural erosion rates, however, the impact of land use may be negligible. In the Phewa Tal watershed in Nepal, for example, only six percent of the total sediment yield has been calculated to stem from surface erosion (Bruijnzeel, 1990). S e d i m e n t can act both as a physical and a chemical pollutant. Physical pollution characteristics of sediment include turbidity (limited penetration of sunlight) and sedimentation (loss of downstream reservoir capacity, destruction of coral reefs, loss of spawning grounds for certain fish). Chemical pollution of sediment includes adsorbed metals and phosphorous, as well as hydrophobic organic chemicals (FAO, 1996). Nutrients and organic matter A change in land use can alter the nutrient content of surface and groundwater, most notably nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) levels. Deforestation can lead to high nitrate (NO3) concentrations in water due to decomposition of plant material and a reduced nutrient uptake by the vegetation. Nitrate concentration in runoff in deforested catchments can be 50 times higher than in a forested control catchment over several years (Falkenmark and Chapman, 1989; Brooks et al., 1991). Agricultural activities can lead to an increased influx of nitrogen into waterbodies as a result of many factors, including fertiliser application, manure from livestock production, sludge from municipal sewage treatment plants, and aeration of the soil. In Europe, agriculture accounts for substantial nitrogen emissions into surface and groundwater. With regard to inorganic N, agriculture accounts for 50 percent in Denmark and 71 percent in the Netherlands (FAO, 1996). High nutrient leaching losses can occur when fertiliser is applied to short-term crops on permeable soils. In Sri Lanka, NO3 -N concentration in groundwater under intensive chilli and onion cultivation reaches 20-50 mg/L (BGS et al., 1996). Continuous soil cover reduces N leaching; fallow periods and soil disturbance increases leaching (BGS et al., 1996). Ploughing can increase NO3 concentrations in surface and groundwater, as oxygenation of the soil causes nitrification (Falkenmark and Chapman, 1989). In rice paddies, leaching losses are likely to be small, due to denitrification in the soil and volatile losses (BGS et al., 1996). Application of manure from livestock production and direct runoff can lead to acidification of soils due to the volatilisation of ammonia, which in turn may increase the solubility of metals in the soil (FAO, 1996). Phosphate (PO4) leaching into water is inhibited by sorption processes to clay particles (BGS et al., 1996). Livestock production, however, can be a major source of P in waters. Direct runoff from intensive livestock farms can lead to serious degradation of surface and groundwater. In the EU, livestock wastes account for 30 percent of P load in surface waters, other agricultural uses account for 16 percent (FAO, 1996). Phosphate-laden sediment can form a nutrient pool on the bottom of eutrophic lakes, which can be released into the water under anoxic conditions. This makes it difficult to control eutrophication in the short term through limitation of P inflow. Eutrophication can be mitigated by dredging sediment or oxidising the hypolimnion, but these options are quite costly (FAO, 1996). The precise role of agriculture in the contamination of ground and surface water is difficult to quantify. In most countries, monitoring is not sufficient to establish the extent of nutrient pollution from agricultural land use. In rural areas, it may be difficult to distinguish between agricultural pollution and pollution by untreated sewage (BGS et al., 1996).
Freshwater aquaculture can add substantial nutrient loading to surface water through waste feed that is not consumed by the fish, and the fish's faecal production (FAO, 1996). Pathogens Land use activities may affect the bacteriological quality of water, which can create health concerns for downstream water users. The concentration of pathogenic bacteria in surface waters may increase as a consequence of riparian grazing activities or waste influx from livestock production. A reduction of stream flow, for example, as a consequence of upstream diversion for irrigation, may lead to ponding in riverbeds, which in turn may provide breeding grounds for vectors of waterborne diseases, such as malaria. Where low flow leads to saltwater intrusion in estuaries, vectors breeding in brackish water may spread (FAO, 1995). Pesticides and other persistent organic pollutants Generally, the application of pesticides poses a danger to surface and groundwater resources, since pesticide compounds are designed to be toxic and persistent. Pesticide leaching into groundwater depends on the chemical's persistence and mobility, as well as the soil structure. Pesticide metabolites might be as toxic and as mobile as the parent compound (BGS et al., 1996). In humans and animals, pesticides can have both acute and chronic toxic effects. Lipophilic compounds can accumulate in fatty tissue (bio-concentration) and in the food chain (biomagnification) (FAO, 1996). Pesticide residues can find their way into water resources through their use in agriculture, forestry and aquaculture. Furthermore, unsafe stockpiling and dumping of old and obsolete pesticides can cause severe ground and surface water contamination (FAO, 1996). Aquaculture can lead to the introduction of biocides, disinfectants and medicines into surface water (FAO, 1996). The actual impact of pesticide contamination of downstream water resources is often difficult to quantify. Pesticide monitoring is difficult because concentrations are very low, large samples and careful sampling, as well as sophisticated analytical instruments, are required (BGS et al., 1996). Since many pesticides are transported in association with suspended matter, water analyses may yield incomplete results. For some pesticides, the analytical capability may not be accurate enough to determine presence or absence for the protection of human health. Newer pesticides which are soluble and degrade more quickly can only be detected shortly after application; therefore, typical monitoring programmes operated on a monthly or quarterly basis are unlikely to be able to quantify the presence and determine the significance of pesticides in surface waters (FAO, 1996). Salinity An increase in salinity of surface and groundwater can have detrimental effects on downstream water uses, for example for irrigation or domestic water supply. The impact of land uses on salinity depends on climatic as well as geological factors. Irrigation and drainage activities may lead to increased salinity of surface and groundwater as a consequence of evaporation and the leaching of salts from soils. This is of special concern.
in arid areas, where subsurface drainage water always has higher salt concentrations, an increased hardness and a higher sodium absorption ratio than the supply water (FAO, 1997a). Drainage from irrigated agriculture may also lead to an increased concentration of selenium in ground and surface water (Postel, 1997). A high application rate of potassium chloride fertiliser can lead to an increased leaching of chloride into groundwater. In Sri Lanka, for example, it has been estimated that in some areas of intensive agriculture, groundwater chloride levels may rise to 400 mg/L by 2010 at current rates of fertiliser application, which by far exceeds the acceptable concentration for drinking water as determined by WHO (250 mg/L) (BGS et al., 1996). In coastal areas, water abstraction for land use activities may indirectly contribute to the salinization of water resources. Groundwater extraction for irrigation, domestic and industrial purposes can result in the intrusion of seawater into the aquifer, and consequently a salinization of the groundwater resources (FAO, 1997). A decrease in river flow due to upstream abstraction or the building of reservoirs can lead to an inland intrusion of brackish water in the estuarine zone (FAO, 1995). Heavy metals Land use practices may directly and indirectly contribute to an increased concentration of heavy metals in water resources. A direct pathway is the application of livestock manure and sludge from sewage treatment plants, which may contain high concentrations of heavy metals. For example, pig manure often contains high concentrations of copper (FAO, 1996). Indirectly, land use may affect heavy metal concentration in surface and groundwater by increasing the mobility of metals in the soil from anthropic or geological origin. Heavy metals in the soil may be transferred into waterbodies by erosive processes. The acidification of soil, caused by ammonia volatilization from manure application or in animal feedlots, may increase the solubility of heavy metals stored in the soil, and thus the influx into surface and groundwater. High abstraction rates of groundwater for irrigation can alter the chemical environment in the soil, leading to an increased mobility of heavy metals of geological origin. This may be the reason for increased arsenic concentration in Bangladesh (Ahmed and Amin, n.d.). Changes in thermal regime The thermal regime of surface water can be affected by land use practices. In small streams, removal of riparian vegetation can cause temperature increase in the water (thermal pollution) (Brooks et al., 1991). Also, tail water discharge from irrigated areas may cause a rise in temperature of the receiving stream (FAO, 1997a). A temperature rise leads to reduced oxygen solubility, which can negatively affect the biological activity in the water as well as the selfcleaning capacity of the river.
SCALE CONSIDERATIONS.
The above review of land use impacts on water resources does not take into account spatial and temporal distribution aspects. Scale considerations, however, are of fundamental importance when assessing these impacts as they indicate whether a land use upstream may affect a water use downstream.
Spatial scale With regard to the spatial scale, i.e. the size of river basin, the land use impact can become less important because of offset effects, such as de-synchronisation (e.g. in the case of floods), storage capacity of the river bed (sedimentation) or the self-cleaning capacity of the river (organic pollution). At the same time, the impact can become more important with increasing scale due to accumulative effects, e.g. in the case of salinity. Land use induced changes of the hydrologic regime and sediment load decrease with the size of the river basin. The effects will be most readily felt in smaller watersheds of up to several hundred km2. One well-documented case is the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin. Studies show that in small-scale catchments (<50 km2) in the basin, erosion and stream flow may be strongly influenced by changing land use patterns (Ives and Messerli, 1989). However, the lowland flooding in Bangladesh is not related to the increased peak flow and erosion resulting from deforestation in the Himalayan uplands in Nepal. The main driving forces behind the flood events in the plains are naturally occurring rainfall events in the lowlands, which may be augmented by human interventions in the floodplains, such as road and river embankments (Hofer, 1998a; Ives and Messerli, 1989). Similarly, the bulk of the sediment load in the Ganges-Brahmaputra river system does not stem from human-induced erosion, but rather from large landslides not influenced by human activity (Bruijnzeel and Bremmer, 1989). With regard to water quality impacts, the picture is much less clear. Observations show that some land use impacts on water quality, like salinity or pesticide load, can also have downstream effects in medium to large watersheds, like the Murray-Darling basin (Australia) and the Colorado basin (USA/Mexico). Other downstream impacts, like organic matter and pathogens, are relevant only at smaller scales. The spatial dimensions of land use effects can be summarized as follows:.
Impact 0.1 Average flow Peak flow Base flow Groundwater recharge Sediment load Nutrients Organic matter Pathogens Salinity Pesticides Heavy metals Thermal regime x x x x x x x x x x x x 1 x x x x x x x x x x x x 10 x x x x x x x x x x x Basin size [km ] 100 x x x x x x x x x x 1 000 x x x x 10 000 x x x 100 000 x x x 2.
Legend: x = Obervable impact; - = no observable impact.
Temporal scale Temporal scale is another important aspect of land use impacts, as it determines the perception of the impact as well as the economic cost associated with it. Two aspects are important with regard to temporal scale of land use impacts. First, the time it takes for a land use to have an impact on downstream uses, and, second, in the case of negative impacts, the time it takes for remedial measures to take effect, if the impact is reversible.
The temporal scales of land use impacts vary widely. Depending on the impact, they may range from less than one year, as in the case of bacterial contamination, to hundreds of years, as in the case of salinity. Similarly, time scales of recovery from adverse impacts are very diverse, depending on the impact. However, in most cases, the time it takes to restore an aquatic system after an adverse impact is much longer than the time it takes for an impact to appear (Peters and Meybeck, 2000).
With regard to land use impacts on hydrologic regimes and sediment transport, there is an inverse relationship between the spatial scale in which the impacts can be observed and the scale in which the redistribution of benefits might be important. These impacts can be most readily felt in small spatial scales. At the same time, the number of water users who might benefit or suffer from this land use change, increases with the size of the watershed. Due to the decreasing magnitude of impact, the respective costs and benefits will be small. Impacts of land use practices on water quality, like salinity, pesticide pollution and eutrophication due to nutrient influx, however, may be relevant in medium- to large-scale river basins as well. These impacts may affect many downstream uses, including providers of drinking water, industries, fisheries and other agricultural uses.
BI B L I O G R A P H Y.
Ahmed, I. & Amin, A. n.d.Arsenic on tap. http://www.dainichi-consul.co.jp/english/arsenic/as18.htm (23/11/98) BGS/ODA/UNEP/WHO. 1996. Characterisation and assessment of groundwater quality concerns in Asia-Pacific Region. Doc. UNEP/DEIA/AR.96-1. Nairobi: UNEP. Bosch, J.M., & Hewlett, J. D. 1982. A review of catchment experiments to determine the effect of vegetation changes on water yield and evapotranspiration. Journal of Hydrology, 55: 3-23. Bowling, L.C., & Lettenmaier, D.P. 1997. Evaluation of the effects of forest roads on streamflow in Hard and Ware creeks, Washington. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA Water Resources Series Technical Report, No.155. Brooks, K.N., Ffolliott, P.F., Gregersen, H.M., & Thames, J.L. 1991. Hydrology and the management of watersheds. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press. Bruijnzeel, L.A. 1990. Hydrology of moist tropical forests and effects of conversion: A state-of-knowledge review. Paris: UNESCO International Hydrological Programme. Bruijnzeel, L.A., & Bremmer, C.N. 1989. Highland-lowland interactions in the Ganges-Brahmaputra river basin: A review of published literature. ICIMOD Occasional Paper, No. 11. Calder, I.R. 1998. Water-resource and land use issues. SWIM Paper.
Colombo: IIMI. Childon, P.J., Jégat, H.J., & Stuart, M.E. 1995. Groundwater and agriculture: The interrelationship. Proceedings of an international seminar, Merida, Venezuela 14-17 October 1992. British Geological Survey Technical Report, No.WD/95/26. Chimatiro, S.K., & Vitsitsi, E.G. 1997. Impact of different land-use activities in the catchment on smallscale fish farming in the southern region of Malawi: Coordination with other sectors. p. 231-241, in: K. Remane (ed) African inland fisheries, aquaculture, and the environment. Rome: FAO. Chomitz, K.M., & Kumari, K. 1996. The domestic benefits of tropical forests. A critical review emphasizing hydrologic functions. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 1601.
Falkenmark, M., Andersson, L., Castensson, R., & Sundblad, K. 1999. Water: A reflection of land use. Options for counteracting land and water mismanagement. Stockholm: Swedish Natural Research Council. Falkenmark, M., & Chapman, T. (eds). 1989. Comparative hydrology. An ecological approach to land and water resources, Paris: UNESCO. FAO. 1987. Guidelines for economic appraisal of watershed management projects. Written by H.M. Gregersen, K.N. Brooks, J.A. Dixon and L.S. Hamilton. FAO Conservation Guide No. 16. FAO. 1993. Prevention of water pollution by agriculture and related activities. Proceedings of the FAO Expert Consultation. FAO Water Reports, No.
FAO. 1995. Environmental impact assessment of irrigation and drainage projects. Written by Dougherty, T.C., & Hall, A.W. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper, No. 53. FAO. 1996. Control of water pollution from agriculture. Written by Ongley, E.D. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper, No. 55. FAO. 1997. Seawater intrusion in coastal aquifers. Guidelines for study, monitoring and control. FAO Water Reports, No. 11. FAO. 1997a. Quality control of wastewater for irrigated crop production. Written by D.W. Westcot FAO Water Reports, No. 10. FAO/Netherlands. 1999. Water. Background Paper 6 of the Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land. Maastricht. Forsyth, T. 1999. Questioning the impacts of shifting cultivation. Watershed, 5(1): 23-29. Graaff, J.de. n.d. The price of soil erosion. An economic evaluation of soil conservation and watershed development. Mansholt Study.
Wageningen, Netherlands: Agricultural University. Harden, C.P. 1993. Land use, soil erosion, and reservoir sedimentation in an Andean drainage basin in Ecuador. Mountain Research and Development, 13(2): 177-184. Hofer, T. 1998a. Floods in Bangladesh. A highland-lowland interaction? Geographica Bernensia G 48. Hofer, T. 1998b. Do land use changes in the Himalayas affect downstream flooding? Traditional understanding and new evidences. Memoir Geological Society of India, 19: 119-141. Ives, J.D., & Messerli, B. 1989. The Himalayan dilemma. Reconciling development and conservation. London: United Nations University Press. La Marche, J., & Lettenmaier, D.P. 1998. Forest road effects on flood flows in the Deschutes river basin, Washington. University of Washington, Seattle. Water Resources Series Technical Report, No.158. Liniger, H., & Weingartner, R. 1992. Water and Soil resource conservation and utilization on the northwest side of Mount Kenya. Mountain Research Development, 12(4): 363-373. Liniger, H., & Weingartner, R. 1997. Mountains and freshwater supply. Unasylva, 49(195): 39-46. NCSAI [National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement]. 1999. Scale considerations and the detectability of sedimentary cumulative watershed effects. NCSAI Technical Bulletin, No. 776. Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Peters, N.E. & Meybeck, M. 2000. Water quality degradation effects on freshwater availability: Impacts of human activities. Water International, 25(2): 185-193. Postel, S. 1997. Last oasis: Facing water scarcity. 2nd edition. New York: W.W. Norton. Tejwani, K.G. 1993. Water management issues: Population, Agriculture and Forests ­ a focus on watershed management. In: Bonell, M., Hufschmidt, M.M. and Gladwell, J.S. Hydrology and water management in the humid tropics. Paris: UNESCO, pp 496-525. Volker, A., & Henry, J.C. (eds). 1988. Side effects of water resources management. Wallingford, UK: International Association of Hydrological Sciences.
Discussion paper 2 Instruments and mechanisms for upstream­downstream linkages: a literature review.
This paper presents the results of a survey of mechanisms and instruments which may be applied to develop social, economic and institutional linkages between upstream land users and downstream water users, based on a desk study on land-water linkages in rural watersheds. The survey focuses on mechanisms and instruments that are explicitly designed to link land users and water users in a watershed context. It proposes a typology of mechanisms and instruments and identifies examples in which these instruments have been applied. Some of the instruments discussed below are not designed to provide linkages between specific upstream and downstream stakeholders, but rather between farmers or land users and the society at large, as in the case of some subsidy schemes. They have been included because they might also be applied in more specific upstream-downstream contexts. Furthermore, such instruments may substantively influence the magnitude of land use impacts on water resources. In some developing countries, for instance, fertilizer subsidies are as high as 50 to 60 percent, leading to low application efficiency and thus resulting in environmental pollution, with negative consequences for the water quality (Lankoski, 1996). In practice, these measures usually do not stand alone, but a mix of instruments is employed. For example, economic incentives may be linked to awareness-building measures. An essential prerequisite for the implementation of any mechanism or instrument linking upstream land users and downstream water users is the assessment of the downstream costs and benefits that arise from upstream land use. In practice, this assessment is a demanding task (see also discussion paper 1). There are many reasons for this, among others:.
· Land use impacts may be difficult to distinguish from natural or other anthropogenic effects,.
e.g. from mining and urbanisation. In comparison with other anthropogenic or natural effects, the land use impacts may be small.
· Some land use impacts, e.g. sedimentation, may occur over long time scales, making the.
present net value of the impact very small.
Discussion paper 2 ­ Instruments and mechanisms for upstream-downstream linkages.
· With regard to some land use impacts, i.e. on the hydrologic regime and sediment transport,.
there seems to be an inverse relationship between the scale at which the impacts can be observed and the scale at which the redistribution of benefits might be important. These impacts can be most readily be felt in small spatial scales, while the number of water users increases with the size of the watershed. Due to the decreasing magnitude of impact at larger scales, the respective costs and benefits to the individual water user may be small.
INSTRUMENTS AND MECHANISMS FOR UPSTREAM-DOWNSTREAM LINKAGES.
Instruments can be structured into: regulatory instruments; economic instruments; educational and awareness-building measures; mechanisms to increase market access; the building of organisational structures; and participatory approaches. Regulatory instruments Regulatory instruments (command and control measures) are widely used in developed countries to protect water resources from agricultural land use practices, including pollution. In Germany, the Federal Water Act provides for the establishment of water protection zones to protect public water supply sources, groundwater and watercourses from sediment, fertilizer and pesticide runoff. In these zones, practices that have a negative impact on water resources may be restricted or forbidden, such as the use of certain pesticides. Farmers suffering economic loss because of these restrictions are eligible for compensation by the state (Kraemer and Buck, 1997). In Thailand, there have been attempts to protect watersheds by imposing land use restrictions according to the vulnerability of the area. The total land area has been divided in five watershed classes, from forested upland watersheds with steep slopes (class 1a) to gentle slopes and flat areas with intensive agriculture (class 5). The most vulnerable watersheds, comprising 16 percent of the total land area in Thailand, have been designated for protection from any use except forest and ecological rehabilitation, including an evacuation of any residents of these areas. This approach, however, has not proven feasible. There is strong political pressure from rural populations demanding compensation for relocation and the restrictions imposed on their lands, as well as limited enforcement capacities on the part of the authorities. As a consequence, the government has granted an amnesty to illegal forest squatters (Krairapond and Atkinson, 1998). Economic instruments Economic instruments to distribute benefits and costs resulting from land use impacts on water resources between upstream and downstream stakeholders include subsidies, taxes, and transferable property or use rights for land, water and emissions. Subsidies Subsidies include direct and indirect payments, such as tax exemptions, price regulations and protective measures, by the state to achieve certain objectives. With regard to land use impacts on water resources, there are direct and indirect subsidy schemes in place aimed at compensating farmers for the costs arising from water protection.
The water tax scheme in the province of Baden-Württemberg, Germany, for example, illustrates the use of both direct and indirect subsidies. A tax is levied on all surface and groundwater abstractions. The proceeds are used to finance compensation payments to farmers for restrictions on fertilizer use in water protection zones (direct payment). Farmers can get a rebate of up to 90 percent on the tax payments for agricultural water use (indirect payment). However, this subsidy is conditional on taking all available measures to save water, and on using surface water instead of groundwater (Kraemer and Buck, 1997). The latter condition is imposed because groundwater is the primary source of drinking water in Germany. Under the New York City Watershed Agreement, owners of forests are eligible for a rebate of up to 80 percent on their property taxes if they prepare a forest management plan and commit themselves to implementing it over a period of 10 years. The management plan includes measures for the maintenance of water quantity and quality (New York Watershed Agricultural Council homepage; Tobias, 1999). In the UK, there is a subsidy scheme in place which compensates farmers for the adoption of farming practices that reduce nutrient leaching, such as reduced fertilizer use or the conversion of arable land to grassland (Kraemer and Buck, 1997). Ta x e s Taxes are another instrument employed to curb negative impacts on water resources of land use practices. The economic incentive for the farmer is the same as in the case of the subsidy. There is an important difference, however: in the case of subsidies, the government pays the farmer for avoiding pollution, while with taxes, the farmer has to pay for activities which are increasing pollution, or the pollution itself. From a property rights viewpoint, the subsidy approach implicitly gives the environmental property rights to the farmer, while in the case of taxes, the rights are allocated to society at large, and the farmer has to pay to use them. Possible approaches include taxes on agricultural inputs (fertilizer, pesticides), taxes based on the nutrient balance, and taxes based on effluent concentration. Taxes on inputs are easy to implement, but their environmental impact may be low for several reasons (see discussion in Lankoski, 1996). Thus, their principal effect may be the reduction of farmer's income. Alternative approaches like a tax based on nutrient balance or effluent concentration may be more efficient in controlling pollution. Their implementation, however, poses immense difficulties, because of problems related to the assessment of non-point source pollution. Flexible property or use rights One way of protecting water resources from land use impacts is through the acquisition of land or land use titles. The New York City Watershed Agreement provides an example of this approach. Under the agreement, the City of New York can purchase land in sensitive areas (e.g. near watercourses, wetlands and reservoirs) in upland watersheds to protect its water supply. These lands are set aside from use or can only be used for certain recreational activities, like hiking or fishing with a special permit. Alternatively, the city can purchase the right to develop a property through a so-called conservation easement. Under this arrangement, the land remains the property of the original owner. However, the owner forfeits the right to develop the land, e.g. to construct buildings or roads. The conservation easement is granted for an indefinite time (Tobias, 1999).
Another possibility to account for land use impact is to introduce a system of permits for river pollution. An example of such an instrument is the salinity mitigation programme within the Murray-Darling river basin in Australia. In view of the increasing cost of salinity for downstream users (cities, industry and agriculture) the three riparian states jointly financed a programme to divert saline groundwater seepage in the lower part of the basin, which decreased downstream salinity. In return, the upstream states receive entitlements to dispose of saline drainage water from irrigation within defined limits. A state can increase its "salinity credit" by contributing to the costs of further downstream groundwater diversion projects. The limited number of available salt disposal entitlements has led to major improvements in irrigation practices and water use efficiency in upstream states. The costs for improvements are shared by the community and the state government. The state government has an incentive to contribute to the improvements to avoid having to invest in projects to increase the salt disposal entitlements (Murray-Darling Commission home page). Education and awareness building Educational programs are used to encourage farmers to switch to less polluting farming practices. In the New York City Watershed Agricultural Program, farmers can participate in environmental audits of their business, which include the identification of potential pollution sources, pollution barriers and hydrologically sensitive areas. (New York Watershed Agricultural Council home page; Walter and Walter, 1999) Similarly, in the UK, a programme of the Ministry of Agriculture offers free farm visits to prepare pollution-risk assessments and waste management plans for farmers (Kraemer and Buck, 1997). These programmes are usually coupled with an incentive programme to reduce pollution risks and to improve the economic performance of the farm. In the New York case, for example, farmers receive financial assistance for pollution-preventing structures, such as cement pipes. Market support The improved access of upstream farmers to downstream markets is another mechanism to improve cooperation between stakeholders: one that may increase farmers' income and, in the framework of a watershed agreement, can be used as an incentive to conserve the resources. (Preston, 1997) For example, under the New York City Watershed Agricultural Program, restaurants, markets and purveyors have committed themselves to purchasing produce from participating farmers (New York Watershed Agricultural Council homepage). Organizations Organizational development is a prerequisite for the successful implementation of instruments establishing linkages between upstream land users and downstream water users. Organizations have two important functions: First, they provide a forum of exchange between upstream and downstream stakeholders. The institutional framework in the Murray-Darling river basin is a good example of such an entity. It consists of three bodies: the Murray-Darling Ministerial Council and the Murray-Darling Basin Commission, comprising ministers of the riparian states and the Australian Federal.
Government, and the Community Advisory Committee, which is made up of representatives of the watersheds that make up the basin, together with special interest groups. Within this framework, decisions are made regarding the sharing of water resources and management costs, as well as long-term management planning for the basin. Decisions in the Ministerial Council and the Basin Commission are taken unanimously, i.e. with the consent of all riparian states (Murray-Daring Basin Commission home page). Second, organizations are vital as a forum to consolidate the interests and opinions of scattered groups of users, e.g. upstream farmers. An example is the Watershed Agricultural Council in New York. This entity was formed by farmers and agri-business leaders upstream of New York City in order to negotiate the Watershed Agreement with the City of New York. The Council now administers the Watershed Agricultural Program aimed at securing the city's drinking water supply (Walter and Walter, 1999). Participatory approaches Participatory approaches to curb negative impacts of land use practices on water resources are frequently applied to improve the management of natural resources, for example through soil and water conservation, and to increase sustainability by including the local population in the planning and implementation process. In addition to the environmental benefits, the aim of the participatory approaches includes economic benefits such as improved farmer income and better livelihood security, as well as social benefits such as the establishment of organizations and decreased out-migration. Usually, the participatory watershed planning and management projects focus on the community level and encompass only very small land units. Reviews suggests that participatory watershed management projects on this level have been very successful and yield better results than soil and water conservation projects focusing on individual farm plots (Hinchcliffe et al., 1995; Farrington and Lobo, 1997). There are some problems with employing participatory approaches to address problems between upstream and downstream communities. First, due to the small scale of this approach, the benefits accrue mostly to the participating farmers themselves. Second, sometimes the hydrological watershed is not socially meaningful as a planning unit for local people, for example, if a community extends over several watersheds. In order for the participatory approach to work, the planning area might have to be adjusted, which might make it more difficult to establish upstream-downstream links (FAO, 1996; FAO, 1998). Third, the scaling-up of participatory approaches to larger watershed units is difficult as it involves the cooperation of government agencies and the establishment of organizations at the watershed level. In particular, this applies to project implementation. In a case study of tank irrigation systems in Sri Lanka, it was found that while in theory water availability could be greatly enhanced through participatory planning at the level of sub-watersheds, implementation of these plans proved to be impossible because of a lack of organizations at the watershed level and reluctance of the local government to support the plans (Jinapala et al., 1996).
CONCLUSION: CRITERIA FOR SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF INSTRUMENTS FOR UPSTREAM­.
DOWNSTREAM LINKAGES.
As a first result of the survey, the following criteria of success for the implementation instruments can be formulated:.
· The impact of upstream land use on downstream water use is well understood.
A clear understanding of the land use impact is an essential prerequisite for the implementation of upstream-downstream links. As the impacts of land use vary greatly because of sitespecific conditions, they must be carefully evaluated in each case (see discussion paper 1).
· The impact of land use on water resources clearly dominates over natural impacts or other.
anthropogenic impacts. In many instances, natural or anthropogenic impacts are present that overlap with land use impacts. In these cases, upstream-downstream links focusing on land uses will only be successful if it can be established that the upstream land use is the dominating factor determining water availability and quality downstream. This may become more difficult as the size of the river basin increases (see discussion paper 1). For Andean watersheds, for example, it has been estimated that landslides occurring during high rainfall years, stream bank erosion, roads and urban development cause more erosion than agricultural activities (Estrada and Posner, 1999).
· The groups of upstream and downstream stakeholders are few and well organized.
The fewer the groups of stakeholders living in a watershed, the easier it will be to implement upstream-downstream links. Similarly, if upstream land users and downstream water users are well organized (e.g. in production associations, water user groups, or through a municipal water utility), the establishment of linkages will be more effective than if there is no connection between individual stakeholders within a group e.g. upstream farmers.
· The economic impact on up- and downstream stakeholders can be quantified.
In the case of New York, for example, the cost of installing filtration equipment to provide safe drinking water was US$6 000 to 8 000 million (Hofmann, 1999), while upper watershed protection measures cost US$600 million, providing a powerful incentive to invest in watershed protection. (Watershed Protection Update).
· The difference in costs between alternatives must be high enough to provide an incentive for.
the participation in the linkage programme. If costs for downstream users are small or occur in the distant future, downstream users are not likely to invest in upper watershed protection. For example, in Columbia, managers of a hydro-electric dam in the Rio San Antonio watershed may be reluctant to finance the conversion of erosion-intensive coffee plantations upstream of the dam because, at current erosion rates, the hydro-electric capacity will only be affected after 80 years (Estrada and Posner, 1999). The absence of a sufficient economic value for downstream users of upstream land use impacts, however, does not imply that upstream watershed protection is not necessary. In some cases, downstream users might be dependent on the resources, but engage in activities that do not generate enough revenue (e.g. subsistence farming) to fund upstream conservation measures (Estrada and Posner, 1999). In other cases, there might be impacts which affect.
environmental goods which do not have an economic value (e.g. aquatic ecosystems which rely on a minimum instream flow).
· There is political commitment to establish upstream-downstream linkages.
If linkages between upstream and downstream users are developed, there has to be a commitment from the government having jurisdiction over the watershed. National and local governments can act as important facilitators and provide institutional support for upstreamdownstream linkage programmes. Conversely, if upstream-downstream linkages are not supported by governments, it may be difficult to implement programmes that go beyond the community scale.
· There is a strong institutional and legal framework that facilitates the implementation of.
linkage instruments. Many linkage instruments require a stable institutional and legal framework for implementation. For example, for the transfer of property rights over land and water, it is imperative that these rights are defined and allocated to land and water users in the first place. Similarly, if regulatory instruments are implemented, institutions are necessary to enforce the regulations.
Abernethy, C.L. 1998. Institutions and processes for sharing water among multiple types of use. Agriculture and Rural Development, 2: 10-13. Bakker, M., Barker, R., Meinzen-Dick, R., & Konradsen, F. (eds) 1999. Multiple uses of water in irrigated areas: A case study from Sri Lanka. SWIM Paper.
Colombo, Sri Lanka: IWMI. Barrow, C.J. 1998. River basin development planning and management: A critical review. World Development, 26 (1): 171-186. Dourojeanni, A., & Jouravlev, A. 1999. El Código de Aguas en Chile: Entre la ideología y la realidad. Document LC/L.1263-P. Santiago: CEPAL. Estrada, R.D., & Posner, J. 1999. Heresy from the hilltop: How useful is the watershed as an organizing principle for research and development? Draft Paper. Lima: CONDESAN. (http://www.inrm.cgiar.org/ documents/centers/heresy2.pdf) FAO. 1994. Water policies and agriculture. In: The State of Food and Agriculture: 228-297. FAO. 1994a. Preparing national regulations for water resources management. Principles and practice. Written by Burchi, S. FAO Legislative Study, No. 52. FAO. 1995a. Water sector policy review and strategy formulation . A general framework. FAO Land and Water Bulletin. No.
FAO. 1995b. Reforming water resources policy. A guide to methods, processes and practices. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper, No. 52. FAO. 1995c. Methodology for water policy review and reform. FAO Water Report, No.
FAO. 1996. Steps towards a participatory and integrated approach to watershed management. Report of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, GCP/INT/542/ ITA, FAO/Italy Cooperative Programme. Tunis. Written by Fé d'Ostiani, L., & Warren, P. (eds). FAO. 1998. Developing participatory and integrated watershed management. A case study of the FAO/ Italy Inter-regional project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD). Written by Warren, P. FAO Community Forestry Case Study Series, No. 13.
Farrington, J., & Lobo, C. 1997. Scaling up participatory watershed development in India: Lessons from the Indo-German watershed development programme. ODI, London, Natural Resource Perspectives. No. 17. Hearne, R.R., & Trava, J.L. 1997. Water markets in Mexico: Opportunities and constraints. IIED, London, Discussion Paper, No. 97-01. Hinchcliffe, F., Guijt, I., Pretty, J.N., & Parmesh, S. 1995. New horizons: The economic, social and environmental impacts of participatory watershed management, IIED, London, Gatekeeper Series, No. 50. Hoffman, R. 1999. The New York Ciy Watershed Agreement. Water Resources Impact 1(5): 2-4. Jinapala, K., Brewer, J.D., & Sakthivanidivel, R. 1996. Multi-level participatory planning for water resourcs development in Sri Lanka. IIED, London, Gatekeeper Series, No. 62. Kraemer, A., & Buck, M. 1997. Water subsidies and the environment. Report OECD/GD(97)220. Paris: OECD. Krairapanond, N., & Atkinson, A. 1998. Watershed management in Thailand: Concepts, problems and implementation. Regulated Rivers: Research and Management, 14: 485-498. Lankoski, J. 1996. Controlling agricultural nonpoint source pollution: The case of mineral balances. UNCTAD, Geneva, Discussion Paper No. 116. Le Moigne, G., Easter, K.W., Ochs, W.J., & Giltner, S. (eds) 1994. Water policy and water markets. World Bank Technical Paper, No. 249. Lyon, R.M. 1989. Transferable discharge permit systems and environmental management in developing countries. World Development, 17 (8): 1299-1312. Murray-Darling Basin Commission homepage: http://www.mdbc.gov.au (17/11/99) New York Watershed Agricultural Council homepage: http://www.nycwatershed.org (18/11/99). Perry, C.J., Rock, M., & Seckler, D. 1997. Water as an economic good: A solution, or a problem? IIMI, Colombo, Research Report No. 14. Pratt, D.J., & Preston, L. 1998. The economics of mountain resource flows. Unasylva, 49(195): 31-38. Preston, L. (ed) 1997. Investing in mountains: Innovative mechanisms and promising examples for financing conservation and sustainable development. Franklin, WV, USA: The Mountain Institute. Rhoades, R.E. n.d. Participatory watershed research and management: Where the shadow falls. IIED, London, Gatekeeper Series, No. 81. Sanders, D.W., Huszar, P.C., Sombatpanit, S., & Enters, T. (eds) 1999. Incentives in soil conservation: From theory to practice. New Delhi: Oxford & IBH. Tobias, D. 1999. Protection of New York City's water supply through land acquisition and stewardship. Water Resources Impact, 1(5): 9-15. Walter, M.T., & Walter, M.F. 1999. The New York City Watershed Agricultural Program: A model for comprehensive planning for water quality and agricultural economic viability. Water Resources Impact, 1(5): 5-9. Watershed Protection Update. http://www.ci.nyc.ny.us/html/news/wsprot.html. (12/11/1999).
LAND USE IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES.
Author: Ian Calder.
This paper aims to provoke discussion on land use and water resource impacts, particularly in relation to rural watersheds in developing countries, with a view towards surfacing key issues, identifying research needs and, ultimately, towards developing guidelines on instruments to distribute costs and benefits arising from land-use impacts on water resources amongst upstream and downstream stakeholders in a watershed. The paper is in three parts which address and question: (i) The adequacy of our scientific knowledge in relation to the environmental processes (biophysical/climate) which determine land use impacts on water resources. (ii) The (often poor) connection between scientific knowledge and policy; the adequacy of the decision-making and policy-making processes of national and international organisations in relation to land use and water resources management; the self sustaining nature of pseudo science myths in relation to land use and water resources and the interdependence and interrelationships of stakeholders in relation to land use and water resources. (iii) The adequacy of current management approaches and the need for consistent policies towards land-use and water resources management, development and poverty alleviation, which are applicable from the local to the global scale.
WATER QUALITY DEGRADATION EFFECTS ON FRESHWATER AVAILABILITY: IMPACTS OF HUMAN.
Authors: Norman E. Peters, Michel Meybeck.
The quality of freshwater at any point on the landscape reflects the combined effects of many processes along water pathways. Human activities on all spatial scales affect both water quality and quantity. Alteration of the landscape and associated vegetation has not only changed the water balance, but typically has altered processes that control water quality. Effects of human activities on a small scale are relevant to an entire drainage basin. Furthermore, local, regional, and global differences in climate and water flow are considerable, causing varying effects of human activities on land and water quality and quantity, depending on location within a watershed, geology, biology, physiographic characteristics, and climate. These natural characteristics also greatly control human activities, which will, in turn, modify (or affect) the natural composition of.
The full text of the background papers may be found on the CD-ROM accompanying this document.
water. One of the most important issues for effective resource management is recognition of cyclical and cascading effects of human activities on the water quality and quantity along hydrologic pathways. The degradation of water quality in one part of a watershed can have negative effects on users downstream. Everyone lives downstream of the effects of some human activity. An extremely important factor is that substances added to the atmosphere, land, and water generally have relatively long time scales for removal or clean up. The nature of the substance, including its affinity for adhering to soil and its ability to be transformed, affects the mobility and the time scale for removal of the substance. Policy alone will not solve many of the degradation issues, but a combination of policy, education, scientific knowledge, planning, and enforcement of applicable laws can provide mechanisms for slowing the rate of degradation and provide human and environmental protection. Such an integrated approach is needed to effectively manage land and water resources.
COMMUNITY-BASED WATER QUALITY MONITORING: FROM DATA COLLECTION TO SUSTAINABLE.
MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES.
Authors: William G. Deutsch, Jim L. Orprecio, Allison L. Busby, Janeth P. BagoLabis, Estela Y. Cequiña.
The paper is an account of how a rural community in the Philippines worked side by side with researchers, non governmental and governmental workers over a five-year period to develop science-based indicators of water quality that proved relevant for developing environmental policy. The case focuses primarily on the early stages of implementing a municipal-level, natural resource management plan in Lantapan, Bukidnon Province, Mindanao. The setting and background of the project are briefly described, followed by the nature of specific indicators and how they were chosen and refined. The paper presents the process by which these indicators influenced policy and concludes with lessons learned throughout the process. The paper emphasizes the methods, results and applications of the biophysical data collected by the citizen monitors.
VALUATION OF WATER-RELATED SERVICES TO DOWNSTREAM USERS IN RURAL WATERSHEDS: DETERMINING VALUES FOR THE USE AND PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES.
Author: Marta Echavarría.
Although water is critical to life and to most resource management activities by humankind, water has a very low price world-wide and, surprisingly, even in areas facing serious water constraints. The costs that a mismanaged upstream landholding can generate for users downstream are rarely accounted for. Or, vice-versa, water quality and flow benefits that a well-preserved watershed area can generate are generally not recognized. This is a definite market failure. Attempts to internalize watershed protection benefits and costs are few. In general, there is a gap between economic theory and actual practice in regard to water resource appraisal, planning, conservation, management and use. Therefore, there is a need to innovate.
and promote policy and institutional changes in water resources management at local and national levels. This paper aims to give insights into economic instruments that can effectively support the wise use and management of watersheds and the protection of hydrological services. It briefly reviews the economic valuation methods commonly used focusing on water related goods and services. It highlights actual cases in Latin America where efforts have been made to link water uses and watershed protection activities and therefore conserve water resources.
DOWNSTREAM EFFECTS OF LAND DEGRADATION AND SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION.
Author: Jan de Graaff.
This paper gives an overview of the downstream effects of soil conservation and watershed development (SCWD) activities, and an outline for the assessment and valuation of the downstream impact of these activities in situations with multiple function reservoirs. For many watersheds insufficient attention is given to erosion control. Thus, reservoirs are fast losing their functions through siltation and changes in streamflow. This may eventually lead to much lower irrigation and hydro-electricity capacities, or to very high costs of dredging and other correcting measures. Since many SCWD projects are initiated to safeguard these reservoirs and other infrastructure, more attention should be paid to the appraisal and valuation of their effects on downstream users.
OPTIMIZING SOIL FERTILITY AND PLANT NUTRITION TO PREVENT GROUNDWATER POLLUTION.
Country: Austria Authors: Peter Cepuder, Volker aus der Schmitten Language: English.
The objectives of this case study were to quantify groundwater pollution through measurements of percolation and nitrate leaching, to compare results with those obtained from a simulation model of leaching and percolation, to determine the effects of crop cover on these variables, and to consider possible recommendations for a sustainable combination of fertilizers and cover crop. A good agreement was found between measurements and simulated results. The simulation model, used to compare percolation and leaching with and without cover crops, found no direct relationship between them. In a comparison of different soil groups, low water storage capacity was found to be associated with significantly higher percolation, nitrogen leaching, and concentration of nitrates in the percolation water. The minimum contamination of groundwater was associated with the soil group that had higher water retention capacity and cover crops. An extension of the results to the entire area suggests that percolation and nitrogen leaching is higher with no cover crop but that lower nitrogen leaching and higher percolation can be obtained by using cover crops only on the soil group with the highest water retention capacity, and not using them on the other two soil groups. No definitive conclusions could be reached regarding the best combinations of soil, crop rotation, cover crop and weather conditions.
INTER-RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN AGRICULTURE AND HYDROLOGY IN LOWLAND AREAS. THE CASE OF THE KANGURA WATERSHED [INTERRELATIONS ENTRE AGRICULTURE ET HYDROLOGIE EN ZONE DE BAS-FOND. EXEMPLE DU BASSIN VERSANT DE KANGURA].
Country: Burkina Faso Authors: C. Cudennec, Y. Sinaré, Daurensan Languages: English, French.
Hydraulic projects have been used to manage hydrometeorological hazards in the lowland areas in order to extend agriculture, which had traditionally only been practised on the hillslopes. This paper describes a study in progress, designed to better understand the functional relationship.
The full text of the case studies may be found on the CD-ROM accompanying this document.
between hillslopes and lowlands, and between stream, overland and groundwater within the lowlands, by identifying the main processes for each geomorphologic entity. Surface flows are measured where the stream enters the lowland area which would only reflect the influence of hillslope processes, and in the lowland, where it would also reflect influences of groundwater and submersion. This data is intended to be combined with piezometric transects, topographic mapping, and geographic diagnosis. The data will be used in the development of a physicallybased model of lowland functioning, intended to provide results of relevance for hydraulic engineering and agriculture at the event scale. This will in turn provide the basis for developing a decision-support system based on simulated scenarios of hillslopes and lowland anthropic modification, including series of hydraulic projects on a single stream.
IMPACT OF UPSTREAM IRRIGATION DAMS ON SURFACE HYDROLOGY. THE CASE OF THE YVEL.
[IMPACT DE RETENUES COLLINAIRES AGRICOLES SUR L'HYDROLOGIE DE SURFACE. EXEMPLE DU BASSIN VERSANT DE L'YVEL].
Country: France Authors: C. Cudennec, M. Sarraza Languages: English, French.
In this case study, dams have been located in the downstream area of an upstream watershed, to store winter flows so that they can be available for irrigation during the period of low stream flows, when water is most needed. A modelling tool is proposed for considering and quantifying their hydrological impacts. Application of the model to this case study shows that downstream modifications reduce upstream hydrographic peaks and also affect the shape of the whole hydrograph. These effects are localized and have a relationship to geographical patterns.
CAN PARTICIPATORY LAND USE PLANNING AT COMMUNITY LEVEL IN THE HIGHLANDS OF NORTHERN THAILAND USE GIS AS A COMMUNICATION TOOL?.
Country: Author: Language: Thailand Oliver Puginier English.
This case study describes a village level participatory process of land use classification and mapping used to inform mediation and conflict resolution between hill tribes and the government. Hill tribes, whose populations have quadrupled over the past 40 years, are in transition from shifting cultivation to permanent residence and long-term agroforestry, and seek land security to insure they can meet their subsistence needs prior to changing traditional farming systems. The government has conflicting interests of forest preservation and integration of ethnic minorities. As a result of the participatory process, villagers changed and strictly follow rules and regulations for natural resource management, organizations within the same watershed improved.
management capabilities, and integration of natural resource conservation with traditions and cultural practices increased community involvement. The mapping shows that forest cover goals were met in this area and that the watershed classification needed to be revised to account for permanent settlements. The maps are being used to petition for recognition of highland farming systems. Although the new government has been hostile to this, participatory mapping has gained greater acceptance in development agencies even if not in policy. A case in which government and village representatives signed written land use agreements may serve as a model in that it provided highland farmers confidence that their management system was endorsed by the government.
A G R I C U LT U R A L P R A C T I C E S SOCIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE.
Country: Canada Author: Randall Kehrig Language: English.
A N D WAT E R Q U A L I T Y I N.
SASKATCHEWAN, CANADA: A.
The purpose of this case study is to provide social insights into policy associated with rural water quality. People who live in rural areas, be they farmers or indigenous populations, have unique relationships with the natural environments around them. Although water is a basic requirement of human, livestock and crop life, the quality of rural water is often overlooked until it raises immediate human health concerns. The intensification of agriculture practices including livestock in controlled environments and the use of commercial fertilizer and farm chemicals has the potential to drastically alter rural water quality. However, water policies designed to ensure water quality are often compromised by the structural conditions of the economy and of the state. This case study examines agriculture practices and water quality in rural Saskatchewan, Canada. It presents exploratory data with a social analysis and several suggestions for more effective policy.
ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF CHANGING WATER QUALITY ON AN IRRIGATION SCHEME: A CASE STUDY FROM SOUTH AFRICA.
Country: South Africa Author: Jack Armour Language: English.
Irrigation agriculture contributes to non-point source water pollution through nutrients, salts and chemicals in return flows, for which farmers are not held accountable. It is expected to expand in South Africa, although irrigation water prices will also be forced up because of increased competition with industrial and municipal uses as water becomes scarcer. The practice of leaching salts out of the soil, is necessary to sustain irrigation agriculture, but has downstream impacts. A model was constructed to allow farmers to consider the potential consequences of various.
combinations of management options and crops under different water quality situations. Data generated by the model that can be used in impact assessment include the volume of salt loaded return-flows, each farmer's contribution to non-point source pollution, economic effects of constraining return flow, and effect of water pricing policy on volume of return flows. It is suggested that different rates should be charged for irrigation waters of different qualities. Greater incentive for efficiency could be achieved by allocating water on a volumetric rather than a per hectare basis. Under the current water pricing system, returns from leaching more than compensate for pumping costs. The trade-off between leaching and downstream effects remains to be quantified.
DEVELOPMENT OF SMALL WATERSHEDS [DESARROLLO DE PEQUEÑAS CUENCAS HIDROGRÁFICAS].
Country: Authors: Language: Cuba Miguel Hernández Bauzá, Nilo Alfonso González Spanish.
This case study discusses the development of small water projects in Cuba. In this particular case, the problem was to provide sufficient water for a new ranching development greater than 100 000 ha for which there are no secure sources or sufficient reserves. Management of the catchment area was regarded as key to development, and allowed agriculture to be organized within the geography of the basin.
INTEGRATING.
Country: Author: Language:.
BIOPHYSICAL, ECOLOGICAL, AND SOCIAL RESEARCH FOR CATCHMENT-SCALE.
MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES: THE MOTUEKA RIVER INITIATIVE.
New Zealand Breck Bowden English.
This case study describes a research programme designed to integrate technical knowledge with social learning, in a framework of integrated catchment management (ICM) for the Motueka river. Main concerns in this catchment are consequences of land and water management on the coastal fishing industries, impacts on trout habitat quality, and conflicts over water allocation. These are associated with steep slopes, seasonal dryness, low-flow and sediment impacts, and transport of nutrients and pathogens. Through a process of stakeholder consultations, involvement of international experts in review and design, and input from research staff, a research plan was agreed upon that is focused on helping to achieve specified national outcomes. Expected project outcomes are to increase awareness of cumulative impacts, the need for catchment scale management, and to provide new knowledge and tools that will provide common ground for decision-making with reduced conflict.
TRACING SEDIMENT TRANSPORT WITH CS-137 ISOTOPES: THE CHASOVENKO CATCHMENT CASE STUDY, CENTRAL RUSSIAN FEDERATION.
Country: Russian Federation Authors: Valentin Golosov, Vladimir Belyaev Language: English.
Chernobyl-derived 137Cs deposits were used to examine the distribution of sediment within the Chasovenkov Verh catchment. Eroded sediments were found to be primarily deposited within the catchment, in the dry creeks or "balka" in the valley, which serve as a sink. These contaminated sediments are therefore not expected to enter the rivers unless there is a change in climate or land use that leads to active incision. It is suggested that this approach can be used to better understand environmental processes in areas of high contamination, and also to assess upstream and downstream interactions.
SOUTHERN HIGHLANDS IRRIGATION INFRASTRUCTURE REFURBISHMENT PROJECT.
Country: Australia Author: Stephen Arnold Language: English.
This case study describes a cooperative approach to natural resource management, which increased the incomes of farmers, enabled them to diversify, and led to more efficient water usage. Downstream benefits were lowered water tables that otherwise dissolve salt and bring it to the surface, and reduced salt accessions into the river system. Measures adopted were reforms to water pricing and allocation which included user fees and tradable water entitlements, provision of economic incentives for efficiency of use; legislative reforms regulating the water industry, investment in public infrastructure to increase efficiency, retirement of agricultural land unsuited to irrigation, and farmer training programs. On-farm water savings of up to 30 percent have been reported and further efficiency gains are expected. Involvement of farmers in the planning and design phase was critical.
LAND­WATER LINKAGES IN THE UPPER NIGER WATERSHED [RELATIONS TERRE-EAU DANS LE BASSIN VERSANT DU NIGER SUPÉRIEUR].
Country: Guinea Author: Sény Soumah Language: French.
The case study describes the general situation of the upper Niger in Guinea in which there are dry areas dependent on irrigation, and where wild fires are a common environmental calamity. A management plan is needed to harmonize resource conflicts in the region.
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ­ PROJECT, KARNATAKA.
Country: Authors: Language:.
OR SHOULD IT BE WATERSHED MANAGEMENT?.
India C. Batchelor, M. Rama Mohan Rao, K. Mukherjee English.
As part of the Karnataka Watershed Development Project (KAWAD) in northern India, a water resources audit study was conducted to consolidate existing data from a wide range of sources, assess the status of land and water resources, and provide a starting point for identifying options. Among the key findings were that groundwater extraction is increasing and its levels are falling. Although local perception attributes this to cutting down of trees, it is driven by higher profitability of irrigated agriculture, grants or cheap loans for well construction, and policies of free electricity for pumping. Although extraction is about equal to recharge, since wells are pumped until they fail every year, some villages extract it at 2.5 times the average recharge rate. Because of this situation, there is no groundwater "buffer" that can be relied on in a drought, and shortages have disproportionate impact on the poor, particularly women and children. Among the conclusions are that water resources are fully developed and emphasis is needed on management, for which over 40 options were identified, that could increase productivity and/or improve equitable access. This implies giving highest priority to drinking water supplies and then allocating it to uses with the highest social and economic value. Village level planning needs to take place within a wider planning framework to facilitate consideration of issues such as upstream-downstream equity, flood protection, drought preparedness, pollution, and biodiversity protection.
INDO-GERMAN WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME GUJARAT: A BASELINE SURVEY.
Country: Authors: India Andreas Groetschel, Ingrid Müller-Neuhof, Ines Rathmann, Hermann Rupp, Ximena Santillana, Anja Söger, Jutta Werner Language: English.
This case study describes a recently initiated programme for improving agricultural potential and living conditions in the semi-arid drought-prone state of Gujarat, to be implemented by villagers with guidance from a Project Implementing Agency that is preferably a local NGO. Types and combinations of physical measures to be implemented in each watershed will be decided through an intensive participatory resource and land use planning process. Another objective is to develop and strengthen social coherence through the establishment of Village Watershed Committees, and to open income generating opportunities for the weaker groups. A baseline survey is to be conducted by a multidisciplinary team of junior experts, to identify issues, stakeholders, potential capacity building institutions, existing government-funded rural development programmes, and to analyze needs of target groups.
COMBATING DROUGHT IN RAJASTHAN THROUGH THE WATERSHED APPROACH.
Country: India Author: B.K. Kakade Language: English.
The paper describes impacts of a watershed development programme that enabled the particular communities involved to maintain increased productivity even during a drought that was devastating to the surrounding districts. The programme was carried out through village level institutions, and the initial assessment blended indigenous with scientific knowledge, which led to the development of innovative measures that were effective for water harvesting. A mid-term survey, at the end of the third year of the project, which was also a drought year, reveals significant increases in particular crops, less use of firewood because of improved cooking devices, reduction in the amount of time needed for women to fetch drinking water, increases in stream flow, and increases in the water tables.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS AND VULNERABILITY OF WATER RESOURCES IN THE BERDAWNI RURAL WATERSHED, BEKAA.
Country: Lebanon Authors: T. Darwish, M. Khawlie, I. Jomaa, R. Chihny Language: English.
This case study presents an assessment of downstream water impacts in the Berdawni watershed, where pollution of surface water has led to increased exploitation of less polluted groundwater for irrigation purposes, and to the uncontrolled development of private wells. The watershed is significant both for industrialization and agriculture and is under increased demographic pressure. Chemical analysis of the Litani river and its branches reveals pollution levels in excess of international norms and levels of tolerance for nickel and chromium that accumulate with irrigation water from the Litani, and also in well water. It concludes that regulatory measures are urgent and that these should be developed and implemented through a participatory process involving stakeholders. Priority should be given to establishing water and instream values and developing strategies needed to assure quality of living, monitoring and updating of databases, and institutional capacity building through a continuous Impact Assessment Program. Environmental impact assessments should also be done for large scale projects, and there should be focus on quality, and on total watershed management.
WATER QUALITY AND MANAGEMENT IN PERI-URBAN KUMASI.
Country: Ghana Authors: D.F.M. McGregor, D. A. Thompson, D. Simon Language: English.
In order to determine effects of urban and peri-urban pollution, measurements were taken at two sites, upstream and downstream from Kumasi, and show significantly higher levels at the downstream site. The main pressure on land use in this area is conversion of agricultural land to housing development. Associated with this are problems with various forms of waste disposal. To improve community awareness, water quality testing kits were provided to selected schools. Ten months following the start of this aspect of the project, the junior high school participants were disseminating knowledge of water quality issues to their communities, in some cases in the form of plays. Following feedback from the schools, improved water quality test kits were provided that enabled them to conduct a wider range of tests and provide a more systematic description of watershed conditions. Their intent is to report any measurements of concern to environmental authorities for verification and follow-up. A more thorough investigation of stakeholder attitudes is planned.
AGRICULTURE AND NITROGEN POLLUTION OF WATER IN BRITTANY [AGRICULTURE ET POLLUTION AZOTÉE DES EAUX EN BRETAGNE].
Country: Author: Language: France Séverine Gibet French.
In western France, Brittany has developed its economy mainly through agriculture. The agricultural revolution has displaced all traditional cultivation but fodder crops have continued. Nowadays, animal husbandry predominates. Over the last 30 years, plant production has increased by 25 percent, while animal production has been multiplied by five. The input of nitrogen on fields to increase yields from the spread of manure originating from animal husbandry accounted for 56 percent, and from fertilizers for 42 percent. During many years, the input of nitrogen was exceeding the need of cultures. Among the consequences of this over-fertilisation, an important nitrogenous pollution has appeared. Since 1972, nitrate concentration in running water increased fivefold, reaching 40mg/L in 1998 and leading to problems for the supply of drinking water.
SMALL HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES AND THEIR IMPACT ON FARMERS' LIVES, STREAMFLOW, SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION AND DOWNSTREAM WATER RESOURCES: THE CASES OF THE SILIANA AND KEF WATERSHEDS [LA PETITE HYDRAULIQUE ET SON IMPACT SUR LA VIE DU PAYSAN, LES EAUX DE RUISSELLEMENT, LA CONSERVATION DES EAUX ET DES SOLS ET LES RESSOURCES EN EAU VERS L'AVAL DANS UN BASSIN VERSANT: CAS DES DEUX BASSINS VERSANTS DE SILIANA ET DU KEF].
Country: Tunisia Author: Mohamed Mechergui Language: French.
The objective of this case study is to present the results of research conducted in Tunisia in two main semi-arid zones dealing with the implementation of small hydraulics for water catchment in the upland and big dams downstream. It was shown that the relationship between upstream and downstream land use is directly related to the rain intensity. When the rain intensity is low, the upstream catchment hydraulic reservoirs makes profit from water and solid transports which gives a bigger life for big dams and the farmers can improve their cereal production by supplement irrigation. However, when the rain intensity is high, the upstream dams collect small quantities of rain but big solid transports and let clear water going downstream to the big dams; the strategic runoff water resource is improved and downstream irrigation is maintained. The mechanism between upstream and downstream in the watershed increases profit for the big dams (clear water downstream, smaller life for upstream reservoirs) and so for the downstream farmers because the national strategy is based on collecting surface runoff in big dams to stabilize or increase production on fertile soils downstream. The question that can be raised is what will be the optimum number of small hydraulics reservoirs upstream and what will be the optimum capacity of downstream reservoirs to minimize the runoff to the sea.
THE ROMWE CATCHMENT STUDY ­ THE EFFECTS OF LAND MANAGEMENT ON GROUNDWATER RESOURCES IN SEMI-ARID ZIMBABWE.
Country: Zimbabwe Authors: P.B. Moriarty, C.J. Lovell Language: English.
Two crucial parameters that control land management and groundwater interactions in the Romwe catchment and that are external to the farming system, are climate and geology. Extreme variability in rainfall follows a pattern, reflected in groundwater levels, of nine years above and nine years below average, found in much of Southern Africa. The pattern is also found in the development of herds during wet periods, and their collapse at the onset of dry periods. The relevant geological characteristic is that groundwater is relatively close to the surface because shallow soils are found on top of impervious rocks or crystalline basement areas, and is therefore always within the root zone of vegetation and therefore constantly in use. Deforestation of the valley bottom increased the water supply, which could be significantly reduced in the event of reforestation or.
woodlot development. In-field structures that create ponding effects increase groundwater recharge. The implications of these observations are that there is a trade-off between forestry and other land uses, and between management for soil moisture to support rain-fed crops, and groundwater recharge, to support irrigated crops. Groundwater is therefore highly localized and is best managed locally. Downstream effects in this case will be minimal.
THE INFLUENCE OF A HEADWATER WETLAND ON DOWNSTREAM RIVER FLOWS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
Country: Author: Language: Zimbabwe Matthew McCartney English.
This paper reports on a study conducted to provide insight into the hydrology of dambos, a type of seasonal wetland, common in the headwaters of many major river systems in southern and central Africa. Although largely based on conjecture, dambos have been attributed an important role in the regional hydrological cycle in the form of dry season flows, and their disturbance is perceived to conflict with their function as a source of downstream flow. Results obtained in this study suggest instead that, although they store significant amounts of water during the wet season, its depletion is dominated by evaporation, with only a small portion contributing to stream flow. Also, that they may reduce floods at the start of the wet season but once the soils are saturated, they generate flood runoff. This suggests that shallow rooted crops could be grown in dambos with little impact on dry season flows.
A QUANTITATIVE TREATMENT ON THE INFLUENCE OF CATCHMENT FEATURES, BASED ON GIS, ON FISH PRODUCTION IN SRI LANKAN RESERVOIRS.
Country: Authors: Language: Sri Lanka Sena S. De Silva, U.S. Amarsinghe, C. Nissanka English.
Sri Lankan reservoirs are the mainstay of an important inland fishery as it is the main source of protein for the rural poor. Fisheries and limnology data were collected at nine perennial reservoirs, and land use patterns were digitized from land use maps. Statistical analysis of catch statistics and reservoir catchment land use features suggest that the extent of forest cover and shrub land in relation to reservoir surface area, were the most determining factor on fish yield. In addition to demonstrating the importance of land use pattern in fish production, the study suggests GIS can be used to formulate yield predictive models in inland waters and can be an effective management tool.
THE GOULBURN BROKEN WATER QUALITY STRATEGY.
Country: Australia Author: Pat Feehan Language: English.
This catchment is a priority catchment for developing a strategy to address algal and nutrient problems. Water quality, as indicated by nitrogen and phosphorus, shows a progressive decline upstream to downstream and algal blooms have been increasing, although total nutrient export to the basin varies with stream flow. Irrigation water is particularly problematic because it is high in nutrients and is released during the summer when most algal blooms occur. The strategy is expected to reduce phosphorus loads by 65 percent over a 20 year period through specific measures to reduce nutrient loads from irrigation drains, sewage treatment plants, fish farms and new developments, by installing filter strips along streams, and through monitoring and evaluation. Cost contributions from downstream beneficiaries are made through the state and federal governments (17 percent each), while catchment stakeholders are expected to cover the remaining 66 percent, specifically to cover works and the full cost of ongoing operations and maintenance of these works. A number of uncertainties in the science made it necessary to make some basic assumptions about whether and to what extent phosphorus reductions will reduce risks of algal blooms, and about how it behaves in the ecosystem. The community recognizes these uncertainties and accepts that the strategy may require modification as more information becomes available.
INTEGRATED LAND AND WATER MANAGEMENT IN THE UPPER WATERSHEDS OF THE ARAL SEA BASIN.
Country: Tajikistan Author: S. Aslov Language: English.
The five Central Asian states affected by the Aral Sea crisis have cooperated to develop a system of interventions to promote efficient use of land and water resources and also improve environmental and socio-economic conditions. Key aspects of the program are assessment of the status of land and water resources as well as living standards, and to identify actions that can be taken to restore degraded ecosystems. The main causes of deteriorating water quality are excessive withdrawal for irrigation and drainage of saline irrigation water containing pesticides, and pollution from domestic and industrial wastewater. Soil erosion is associated with both irrigated and rainfed agriculture and with pasture, and has led to intensive gully formation. More needs to be known about the dynamics of soil erosion and its spread, as a basis for identifying urgently needed control measures. In a pilot project proposed for Tajikistan, where the main problem is unavailability of drinking water, in addition to all of the above, expected benefits to the local population include construction of a complete drinking water tap system, development of sanitary systems, construction of structures to prevent damages from mudflows, erosion control and reclamation of degraded lands, multipurpose land uses that include small enterprises, small power plants based on renewable energy sources, and socio-economic studies to evaluate and guide the project.
COLLECTIVE ACTION TO FIGHT SOIL EROSION IN RÉUNION [ACTION CONCERTÉE DE LUTTE CONTRE L'EROSION DES SOLS À LA RÉUNION].
Country: Authors: Language: Réunion Denis Groene, Alain Hébert, G. Benoit French.
Situated in the Indian Ocean, the island of La Réunion is a part of France. It is inhabited since the 16th century. Nine tenths of the total area (2512 km2) are covered by a volcanic mountain. The population is 700 000 people (density 280 / km2). The climate is tropical with heavy rains and annual cyclones. Landscapes are very impressive, with huge abysses. The social and economic background is tense, with an unemployment rate about 37 percent. The paper presents a programme of action in progress since 1988, to mitigate the soil erosion. This action started with small land use improvements planned, implemented and monitored by farmers. Now, in 2000, 18 projects involve 250 farmers working on a total area of 1 200 ha. The programme is continuing by focusing on training and building a public awareness of soil as an limited natural resource. The Environment Chart (1996) of La Réunion has included the erosion as one of its four main topics.
MICRO-DAMS FOR RAINFALL WATER RETENTION IN CENTRAL-WEST BRAZIL: PILOT PROJECT ON WATER AND SOIL CONSERVATION IN THE MICRO-BASIN OF THE PAIOL.
Country: Brazil Author: Luciano Cordoval de Barros Language: English.
The accelerated and disorganized deforestation in Central Brazil and the transformation of these natural ecosystems into crop land or pastures, without adequate technologies, resulted in irrecoverable damages to the environment, especially with respect to water and soil conservation, with particular mention to compaction. As a consequence, the soil intake rate decreased and surface runoff increased, thus causing laminar erosion, low soil quality, silting up of rivers, floods and decreased sustainability of family properties. With the objective of reverting this scenario, a demonstrative unit was implemented in Sete Lagoas, MG (1 350 mm rainfall per year), in 1995. On a property of 70 ha, 30 micro-dams ("barraginhas") were built to contain surface runoff damages. These micro-dams also retain pollution sources carried by the waters and favour the recharge of good quality water tables, by means of improving soil intake rate, recovering water sources and alleviating droughts. Due to the success of this demonstration unit, by means of field visits by farmers, NGOs and publication of articles in journals and national/international congresses, a decision was taken to extend the experience and build 960 low-cost micro-dams, in 1998, in 60 small properties covering all the micro-basin of the Paiol stream, comprising a total area of approximately 40 km2, in the village/community of Estiva, Sete Lagoas county. That was only possible because of the active participation of small farmers in the indication of existing degraded sites and the support provided in terms of food and lodging for the working teams. As a result, it is now possible to hear the farmers testimonials on the effects observed in elevation.
of water tables observed in their domestic reservoirs ("cisternas"), better utilization of the water and drought alleviation, that have increased their yields.
THE IMPACT OF DRAINAGE OF AGRICULTURAL SOILS ON ANNUAL RUNOFF: AN EXAMPLE FROM THE BRIE REGION [RÔLE DU DRAINAGE AGRICOLE ENTERRÉ SUR LES ÉCOULEMENTS ANNUELS: UN EXEMPLE EN RÉGION DE GRANDE CULTURE (BRIE)].
Country: France Authors: Claude Cosandey, Marie-Josée Penven, Tatiana Muxart Language: French.
On the Brie plateau, as in numerous places in France, agricultural soils are drained by pipes, in relation to new agricultural practices. In order to study the role played by this drainage network in the transfer of water from the soil surface to the stream, three small hydrological bodies (6.4 ha, 4.6 and 30.6 km²) with pipe drains, are monitored. Three hydrological winters are considered here, under contrasting rainfall conditions. The answers of the three hydrological bodies are similar in terms of rhythms, but quite different in terms of runoff coefficient. When the soil water content is at field capacity, the total amount of effective rainfall is very quickly transferred by the pipes to the stream in the drained parcel. In the two small watershed, only about 60 percent of effective rainfall appear as surface runoff during winter. The results raise the question about the role of drainage on flood magnitude.
WATER QUALITY AND RURAL SOCIETY: POTENTIAL HEALTH RISKS IN THE LOWER RÍO COLORADO WATERSHED. THE CASE OF THE MEXICALI VALLEY [CALIDAD DE AGUA Y SOCIEDAD RURAL, RIESGOS POTENCIALES DE SALUD EN LA CUENCA BAJA DEL RÍO COLORADO: EL CASO DEL VALLE DE MEXICALI].
Country: Mexico Author: Alfonso Cortez Lara Language: Spanish.
This study evaluated levels of nitrogen pollution in the eastern Mexicali Valley. 68 rural wells were sampled, a survey of households interviews with key actors were conducted to identify relationships between socio-economic conditions and health, and technical information was reviewed. Based on a nitrogen budget, it was estimated that the amount reaching the aquifer is 22.9 mg/L, over twice the limit established by the United States Public Health Service, and therefore represents a health risk to the local population. Nitrogen contamination was not found in the regional aquifer during the first phase but a large portion of the population has been using latrines for over 20 years, fertilize with nitrogen, and have shown some signs of water related illness including cancer among children, although there has not been sufficient evidence to link this to water consumption. 69 percent believe that water consumed is of good quality, based on.
personal experience. The low level of awareness of causes of potential contamination of the aquifer limits the capacity to implement preventative measures. The government has done little to disseminate information about the problem and, according to consumers, there was insufficient government action and little or no coordination among government agencies.
ESTIMATION OF BASIN SEDIMENT FLUX IN THE PANG KHUM EXPERIMENTAL WATERSHED IN NORTHERN THAILAND: THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF ROADS AND AGRICULTURAL LANDS.
Country: Authors: Language: Thailand Alan D. Ziegler, Thomas W. Giambelluca, Ross A. Sutherland English.
Stream sediment load and sediment contributions from roads, paths, and agricultural lands are estimated for a one-year period in an upland watershed in northern Thailand. Total road sediment input to the stream was only slightly higher than that from agricultural lands (30-41 versus 25-40 Mg), but corresponding erosion rates were substantially greater (65-88 versus 2-4 Mg ha-1 y-1). The results emphasize that basin sediment yield is not a reliable indicator of the existence of severe erosion within a watershed. Rather, sediment budgeting approaches are needed to uncover important sediment sources that occupy small percentages of the total basin area (e.g., roads). Finally, the trend of focusing solely on impacts of agricultural practices on erosion, ignoring impacts associated with unpaved roads, is not a sustainable conservation strategy for managing upland watersheds in southeast Asia.
INFLUENCE OF LAND USE ON THE HYDROLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF VOLCANIC SOILS: THE CASE OF CATCHMENTS PROVIDING WATER TO ANDEAN CITIES.
Country: Authors: Language: Ecuador W. Buytaert, B. De Bièvre, J. Deckers, G. Dercon English.
In the catchment of the Rio Paute in the southern Andes of Ecuador, soils have a high water retention and regulation capacity because of the presence of allophane clay in which hollow spheres are formed which show microscopic pores that store water. However, it is not clear which phenomena control the retention and release of water (e.g. retention in soil, in vegetation, in organic matter layers, in swamps, lakes, forests...) The case study analyzes effects of land use on retention capacity. Cultivation affects hydrophysical properties but traditional methods do not seem to apply as they are based on concepts of equilibrium between gravity, capillary and hygroscopic forces ­ other forces are active in the andosols. So it is not clear what actions of stakeholders will affect downstream water availability, which makes negotiation difficult.
THE WATERSHED PROTECTION FUND (FONAG) AS A MECHANISM FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE CAYAMBE-COCA AND ANTISANA RESERVES IN ECUADOR [EL FONDO PARA LA PROTECCIÓN DEL AGUA Y LAS CUENCAS (FONAG) COMO MECANISMO PARA LA CONSERVACIÓN DE LAS RESERVAS CAYAMBE- COCA Y ANTISANA EN ECUADOR].
Country: Ecuador Author: M. Echavarría Language: Spanish.
The case study describes a proposed financing mechanism for water and watershed protection activities in the upper watersheds of the city of Quito, Ecuador. Local (e.g., the water supply company) and international sources will be contributing to the fund. The fund will be governed by a board consisting of representatives from the local water and electricity companies, water users, the regional and local government, communities, and non-governmental organizations. It will finance conservation activities with the aim of ensuring a clean, dependable water supply.
IMPACTS OF IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT ON SMALL-SCALE AQUATIC RESOURCES: A CASE STUDY OF SOUTHERN LAOS.
Country: Authors: Laos Sophie Nguyen Khoa, Kai Lorenzen, Caroline Garaway, Robert Arthur, Bounthanom Chamsingh, Douangchith Litdamlong, Nick Innes-Taylor, Darrell Siebert Language: English.
In southern Laos, where there is heavy livelihood dependence on aquatic resources, irrigation was found to have moderate but significant impacts, which need to be considered in cost-benefit analysis and environmental assessments of small and medium scale irrigation schemes. Proliferation of these schemes may lead to even greater cumulative impacts. Although there were no significant effects near new reservoirs, these are not accessible to those impacted downstream and only provide partial compensation.
No.* 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 37 38 39 Contributor Jean-Marc Faurès Thomas Hofer Bo Appelgren Christophe Cudennec Dwight Kimsey Nabil El-Khodary Ian Calder Nilo Alfonso Denis Groené Thierry Facon Wenny Ho Vaughan Davidson Jean-Marc Faurès Jacobijn van Etten Valentin Golosov Kai Lorenzen Wenny Ho John Dixon Getachew Belaineh Patrick Moriarty Bo Appelgren James Marple Ian Calder Mohamed Mechergui Wenny Ho Mervin Stevens Jan de Graaff Gordon Fairchild Vladimir Golosov Ruth Meinzen-Dick Nabil El-Khodari Patrick Moriarty Intervention Theme W atershed Management in Morocco Land­water links in the Himalayan region, International Year of Mountains Case study: The Nile basin W atershed vs. hillslope management Sediments as pollutants? Nile and Niger: A comparison Reflections on "land degradation" Erosion, watershed conservation and rural poverty Land use impacts on groundwater W atershed management in Fouta Djallon (Guinea); Downstream benefits of paddy cultivation W atershed management and poverty alleviation Holistic approach to basin management W atershed management and poverty alleviation W ater management through rehabilitation of Paals in Rajasthan, In dia Impact of intensive agriculture on river degradation in Russia Impacts of irrigation structures on fisheries in Southern Laos W atershed management through self-help groups Negotiating platforms for stakeholders in watersheds W atershed degradation in Ethiopia Land­water linkages in Zimbabwe: Human vs. natural factors Upstream-downstream compensation Sandstone Creek Watershed Project, Oklahoma, USA Flooding and deforestation in the Mekong basin Impact of upstream hydraulic structures on downstream dams Relations between on-farm and watershed-based water management Research needs vs. implementation, impacts of forests, and involvement of people in watershed management W atershed development vs. watershed management Impacts of agriculture on water resources in New Brunswick, C anada Impacts of intensive agriculture on river degradation in Russia Benefit and cost sharing in natural resource management on household, community and watershed levels Cooperation strategies in the Nile Basin On-site and downstream benefits in watershed management.
* Administrative messages by the team are not included in this list, thus, the numbering is not consecutive.
No .* 40 41 42 43 44 45.
C o n t ri b u t o r Sally Bunning Mohamed Mechergui Ian Calder Arthur Conacher Jan de Graaff Mark Hopkins.
Intervention Theme Simple, farm-based monitoring of erosion and nutrient flux W ater distribution in national vs. international watersheds Resource focus and people focus in watershed management Estimating sediment yields in agricultural catchments, SW Australia Monitoring of land use impacts; set-up of watershed organizations Land degradation and land tenure in Ethiopia; Impacts of shifting cultivation in Bangladesh; impacts of agroforestry on soil erosion (Philippines) Valuation of land use impacts in complex natural systems Land use impacts at different scales; criteria for benefit-sharing instruments Dynamics in benefits and costs W atershed management impacts on groundwater recharge; upstream-downstream linkages and water quality in France Public perception of watershed management impacts; watershed organizations in Colombia Collective action and land tenure issues in watershed management Case study: upstream/downstream benefit-sharing between farmers and fishermen in the Philippines Forestry myths; watershed management in New Hampshire Scale issues; communication and ethics in watershed management Impacts of agriculture on water quality in Canada; polluter pays principle Myths about land­water linkages and their impact on policy River basin organizations in Asia Influence of land use on hydrological properties of volcanic soils.
Lia van Wesenbeeck, Peter Albersen Moderating Team John Dixon Thierry Facon Marta Echavarría Ruth Meinzen-Dick Astrid Agostini Mervin Stevens Bo Appelgren Randall Kehrig James Hafner Thierry Facon W . Buytaert, B. De Bièvre, J. Deckers, G. Dercon Marta Echavarría Denis Groené Bo Appelgren Mervin Stevens David Groenfeldt Nabil El-Khodari C.H.Batchelor.
The Water and Watershed Protection Fund: a case study from Ecuador Decision-making and uncertainty in watershed management Prioiritizing land use impacts Necessity for a holistic approach to watershed management W atershed consciousness Assessing basin-wide impacts of large scale land and water use schemes Need for a sound data base for decision making in watershed management; impact of groundwater extraction; rural-urban relationships Participation, gender and equity issues in watershed management Urban areas in watersheds Integration of sound land and water management in development policy.
Vasudha Pangare Trent Biggs Ian Calder.
Questions for Discussion.
Part I: Land­Water Linkages: The Landscape Perspective.
How can we classify land­water linkages in terms of land 18 September - Session 1: use impacts on water resources? Understanding 23 September and categorizing.
What are the impacts of land use on the water resources land­water and how do they vary in relation to agro-ecological and linkages socio-economic conditions?.
What are the impacts of land use on living aquatic resources and ecosystems?.
What is the relative importance of anthropogenic and natural causes in degradation of water resources?.
How does the relative importance of the impact change with the size of the watershed?.
Is our scientific knowledge and understanding adequate in relation to the environmental processes involved in landwater linkages? 25 September - Session 2:.
Which tools and methods exist to assess the relation between land use and water resources? 29 September Assessing and perceiving land­.
Which parameters and indicators can be used to measure water linkages land-use impacts on water resources?.
What are technical and financial constraints in assessing land­water linkages? 10. What is the relation between perceived and real impacts? 11. How can we best deal with variability and uncertainty in assessing land­water linkages? 12. What is the importance of time in the assessment and perception of land use impacts? Part II: Land­Water Linkages ­ The Lifescape Perspective 2 October 6 October Session 3: Valuing the impact of land­ water linkages 13. Which direct water uses (e.g. domestic use, irrigation) are affected by impacts of land use on water resources, and how? 14. Which indirect uses of water (e.g. fisheries, flood control, self-cleaning capacity) are affected by land use impacts on water resources, and how? 15. How can we value these effects in terms of benefits or costs for downstream users? 16. What is the importance of time and spatial scale in valuing land-use impacts on water resources? Session 4: 17. What types of mechanisms can be used to link upstream and downstream users in different socio-economic contexts Sharing benefits and at different watershed scales? and costs resulting from 18. What are examples of such mechanisms which have land­water yielded promising results? linkages 19. What are the main constraints to implementation of these mechanisms? 20. Can we identify criteria of success for the implementation of such mechanisms?.
9 October 13 October.
Time 16 October 27 October.
Part III: Land­Water Linkages: The Way Forward Session 5:.
Can we prioritize land use impacts on water resources that should be the focus of further work on the issue? Conclusions and recommenda2. Can we identify regions, climate zones, and sociotions economic conditions, in which land-water linkages play an especially important role and need to be addressed as a matter of priority?.
Can we identify successful or promising mechanisms and instruments to share benefits and costs resulting from landwater linkages by upstream and downstream people which should be focused on in further work on the issue?.
Are current land and water management guidelines adequately addressing land-water linkages?.
How can the feedback between local know-how, scientific knowledge and policy decisions with regard to land­water linkages be improved?.
Which recommendations can we formulate with respect to · hydrologists? · economists? · policy makers? · development agencies? · local resource managers?.
