Procedural Manual.
Codex Alimentarius Commission.
Introduction.
I NTRODUCTION.
The Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission is intended to help Member governments participate effectively in the work of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The Manual is particularly useful for national delegations attending Codex meetings and for international organizations attending as observers. It will also be useful for Member Governments which wish to participate in Codex work by correspondence. Section I sets out the Commission's basic Rules of Procedure and the other internal procedures necessary to achieve the Commission's objectives. These include the procedures for the elaboration of Codex Standards and related texts, general principles and guidelines for the acceptance of Codex standards by governments, and some basic definitions. Section II is devoted to guidelines for the efficient operation of Codex Committees. These Committees are organized and operated by Member Governments designated by the Commission. It describes how standards are set out in a uniform manner, describes a uniform reference system for Codex documents and working papers, and provides a number of general principles for formulating key sections of Codex standards and outlines the core functions of national Codex Contact Points. Section III lists the Commission's subsidiary bodies with their Terms of Reference. It also gives the Membership of the Commission (169 Member countries in July 2003) together with the addresses of Codex Contact Points. This Thirteenth Edition of the Procedural Manual was prepared by the Secretariat following the Twenty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome, 2003. Further information concerning the Codex Alimentarius Commission and its Subsidiary Bodies can be obtained from the Secretary, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Statutes Rules of Procedure Elaboration Procedures General Principles Definitions.
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION The Statutes and Rules of Procedure of the Codex Alimentarius Commission were first established by FAO Conference and the World Health Assembly in 1961/62 when the Commission itself was established. The Statutes were revised in 1966. The Rules of Procedure have been amended on several occasions, the last time being in 2003. The Statutes form the legal basis of the Commission's work and provide its mandate or terms of reference. The Rules of Procedure describe the formal working procedures appropriate to an intergovernmental body. The Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards describes the way by which Codex standards are prepared and the various Steps in the process which ensure comprehensive review of draft standards by governments and other interested parties. It was comprehensively revised in 1993 to provide a uniform elaboration procedure for all Codex standards and related texts. The Procedure allows the use of a "fast-track" approach in cases where urgent action is needed. The General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius define the Scope and the purpose of Codex Standards and the way by which governments indicate their formal acceptance of the Standards. The Guidelines on Acceptance provide additional information to Member governments on the procedures regarding acceptance. This Section concludes with Definitions for the Purpose of the Codex Alimentarius which assist in the uniform interpretation of these texts.
STATUTES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission shall, subject to Article 5 below, be responsible for making proposals to, and shall be consulted by, the DirectorsGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) on all matters pertaining to the implementation of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the purpose of which is: (a) protecting the health of the consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade;.
(b) promoting coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non governmental organizations; (c) determining priorities and initiating and guiding the preparation of draft standards through and with the aid of appropriate organizations;.
(d) finalizing standards elaborated under (c) above and, after acceptance by governments, publishing them in a Codex Alimentarius either as regional or world wide standards, together with international standards already finalized by other bodies under (b) above, wherever this is practicable; (e) amending published standards, after appropriate survey in the light of developments.
Membership of the Commission is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO which are interested in international food standards. Membership shall comprise such of these nations as have notified the Director-General of FAO or of WHO of their desire to be considered as Members.
Any Member Nation or Associate Member of FAO or WHO which is not a Member of the Commission but has a special interest in the work of the Commission, may, upon request communicated to the Director-General of FAO or WHO, as appropriate, attend sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies and ad hoc meetings as observers.
Nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of FAO or WHO, are members of the United Nations, may be invited on their request to attend meetings of the Commission as observers in accordance with the provisions of FAO and WHO relating to the grant of observer status to nations.
The Commission shall report and make recommendations to the Conference of FAO and the appropriate body of WHO through their respective DirectorsGeneral. Copies of reports, including any conclusions and recommendations, will be circulated to interested Member Nations and international organizations for their information as soon as they become available.
The Commission shall establish an Executive Committee whose composition should ensure an adequate representation of the various geographical areas of the world to which the Members of the Commission belong. Between sessions, the Executive Committee shall act as the Executive organ of the Commission.
The Commission may establish such other subsidiary bodies as it deems necessary for the accomplishment of its task, subject to the availability of the necessary funds.
The Commission may adopt and amend its own Rules of Procedure which shall come into force upon approval by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, subject to such confirmation as may be prescribed by the procedures of these Organizations.
The operating expenses of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies, other than those for which a Member has accepted the Chair, shall be borne by the budget of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme which shall be administered by FAO on behalf of the two Organizations in accordance with the financial regulations of FAO. The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall jointly determine the respective portion of the costs of the Programme to be borne by each Organization and prepare the corresponding annual expenditure estimates for inclusion in the Regular Budgets of the two Organizations for approval by the appropriate governing bodies.
All expenses (including those relating to meetings, documents and interpretation) involved in preparatory work on draft standards undertaken by Members of the Commission, either independently or upon recommendation of the Commission, shall be defrayed by the government concerned. Within the approved budgetary estimates, the Commission may, however, recommend that a specified part of the costs of the preparatory work undertaken by the government on behalf of the Commission be recognized as operating expenses of the Commission.
Rules of procedure.
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
RULE I MEMBERSHIP.
Membership of the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission, hereinafter referred to as "the Commission", is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO.
Membership shall comprise such eligible nations as have notified the Director-General of FAO or of WHO of their desire to be considered Members of the Commission.
Membership shall also comprise regional economic integration organizations members of either FAO or WHO that notify the Director-General of FAO or WHO of their desire to be considered Members of the Commission.
Each Member of the Commission shall communicate to the DirectorGeneral of FAO or of WHO the names of its representative and where possible other members of its delegation before the opening of each session of the Commission.
RULE II - MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS.
A Member Organization shall exercise membership rights on an alternative basis with its Member States that are Members of the Commission in the areas of their respective competence.
A Member Organization shall have the right to participate in matters within its competence in any meetings of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies in which any of its Member States is entitled to participate. This is without prejudice to the possibility for the Member States to develop or support the position of the Member Organization in areas within its competence.
A Member Organization may exercise on matters within its competence, in any meetings of the Commission or any subsidiary body of the Commission in which it is entitled to participate in accordance with paragraph 2, a number of votes equal to the number of its Member States which are entitled to vote in such meetings and present at the time the vote is taken. Whenever a Member Organization exercises its right to vote, its Member States shall not exercise theirs, and conversely.
A Member Organization shall not be eligible for election or designation, nor to hold office in the Commission or any subsidiary body. A Member.
Organization shall not participate in voting for any elective places in the Commission and its subsidiary bodies.
Before any meeting of the Commission or a subsidiary body of the Commission in which a Member Organization is entitled to participate, the Member Organization or its Member States shall indicate in writing which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, has competence in respect of any specific question to be considered in the meeting and which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, shall exercise the right to vote in respect of each particular agenda item. Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a Member Organization or its Member States from making a single declaration in the Commission and each subsidiary body in which a Member Organization is entitled to participate for the purposes of this paragraph, which declaration shall remain in force for questions and agenda items to be considered at all subsequent meetings, subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be indicated before any individual meeting.
Any Member of the Commission may request a Member Organization or its Member States to provide information as to which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, has competence in respect of any specific question. The Member Organization or the Member States concerned shall provide this information on such request.
In cases where an agenda item covers both matters in respect of which competence has been transferred to the Member Organization and matters which lie within the competence of its Member States, both the Member Organization and its Member States may participate in the discussions. In such cases the meeting, in arriving at its decisions,1 shall take into account only the intervention of the party which has the right to vote.2.
For the purpose of determining a quorum, as specified in paragraph 6 of Rule V, the delegation of a Member Organization shall be counted for a number equal to the number of its Member States which are entitled to.
The word `decisions' should be understood to mean both voting and situations where a decision is taken by consensus. The above is without prejudice to the question of whether or not the views of the party not having the right to vote shall be reflected in the report of the meeting. Where the views of the party not having the right to vote are reflected in the report, the fact that they are the views of the party not having the right to vote shall also be reflected in the report.
participate in the meeting and are present at the time the quorum is sought, to the extent that it is entitled to vote under the relevant agenda item.
RULE III OFFICERS.
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and three Vice-Chairpersons from among the representatives, alternates and advisers (hereinafter referred to as "delegates") of the Members of the Commission; it being understood that no delegate shall be eligible without the concurrence of the head of his delegation. They shall be elected at each session and shall hold office from the end of the session at which they were elected until the end of the following regular session. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons may remain in office only with the continuing endorsement of the respective Member of the Commission of which they were a delegate at the time of election. The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall declare a position vacant when advised by the Member of the Commission that such endorsement has ceased. The Chairperson and ViceChairpersons shall be eligible for re-election but after having served two consecutive terms shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term.
The Chairperson, or in his absence a Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at meetings of the Commission and exercise such other function as may be required to facilitate the work of the Commission. A Vice-Chairperson acting as Chairperson shall have the same powers and duties as the Chairperson.
When neither the Chairperson nor the Vice-Chairperson are able to serve and, on the request of the outgoing Chairperson, during elections for the Chairperson, the Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall appoint a staff member to act as Chairperson, until either a temporary Chairperson or a new Chairperson has been elected. Any temporary Chairperson so elected shall hold office until the Chairperson or one of the Vice-Chairpersons is able to serve again.
(a) The Commission may appoint a Coordinator from among the Members of the Commission for any of the geographic locations enumerated in Rule IV.1 (hereinafter referred to as "regions") or for any group of countries specifically enumerated by the Commission (hereinafter referred to as `groups of countries'), whenever it may find, on the basis of a proposal of a majority of the Members of the Commission which constitute the region or group, that work for the Codex Alimentarius in the countries concerned so requires. (b) Appointment of Coordinators shall be made exclusively on the proposal of a majority of the Members of the Commission which constitute the region or group of countries concerned. Coordinators shall hold office from the end of the session of the Commission at which they were appointed until not.
later than the end of the third succeeding regular session, the precise term being determined by the Commission in each instance. After having served two consecutive terms, the Coordinators shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term. (c) The functions of the Coordinators shall be: (i) to assist and coordinate the work of the Codex Committees set up under Rule X.1(b)(i) in their region or group of countries in the preparation of draft standards, guidelines and other recommendations for submission to the Commission;.
(ii) to assist the Executive Committee and the Commission, as required, by advising them of the views of countries and recognized regional intergovernmental and non-government organizations in their respective regions on matters under discussion or of interest. (d) In order to carry out their functions, Coordinators shall participate in the Executive Committee as Observers.
The Commission may appoint one or more rapporteurs from among the delegates of the Members of the Commission.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall be requested to appoint from the staffs of their organizations a Secretary of the Commission and such other officials, likewise responsible to them, as may be necessary to assist the officers and the Secretary in performing all duties that the work of the Commission may require.
RULE IV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chairperson and ViceChairpersons of the Commission together with seven further members, elected by the Commission at regular sessions from among the Members of the Commission, one each coming from the following geographic locations: Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Near East, North America, South-West Pacific; it being understood that not more than one delegate from any one country shall be a member of the Executive Committee. Members elected on a geographic basis shall hold office from the end of the session of the Commission at which they were elected until the end of the second succeeding regular session and shall be eligible for re election, but after having served two consecutive terms shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term.
The Executive Committee shall, between sessions of the Commission, act on behalf of the Commission as its executive organ. In particular the Executive Committee may make proposals to the Commission regarding the general orientation and programme of work of the Commission, study special problems and help implement the programme as approved by the Commission. The Executive Committee may also exercise, when it shall deem it to be essential and subject to confirmation by the next session of the Commission, the Commission's powers under Rule X.1(b)(i), Rule X.5 insofar as it refers to bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i), and Rule X.10, insofar as it refers to the designation of the Members who shall be responsible for appointing Chairpersons to subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i).
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons of the Commission shall be respectively the Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons of the Executive Committee.
Sessions of the Executive Committee may be convened as often as necessary by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, in consultation with the Chairperson. The Executive Committee shall normally meet immediately prior to each session of the Commission.
The Executive Committee shall report to the Commission.
RULE V SESSIONS.
The Commission shall in principle hold one regular session each year at the Headquarters of either FAO or WHO. Additional sessions shall be held as considered necessary by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO after consultation with the Chairperson of the Executive Committee.
Sessions of the Commission shall be convened and the place of the meeting shall be determined by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO after consultation where appropriate, with the authorities of the host country.
Notice of the date and place of each session of the Commission shall be communicated to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the session.
Each Member of the Commission shall have one representative, who may be accompanied by one or more alternates and advisers.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held in public, unless the Commission decides otherwise.
The majority of the Members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of making recommendations for amendments to the Statutes of the Commission and of adopting amendments of, or additions to, the present.
Rules in accordance with Rule XIV.1. For all other purposes the majority of the Members of the Commission attending the session shall constitute a quorum, provided that such a majority shall be not less than 20 percent of the total membership of the Commission, nor less than 25 Members. In addition, in the case of amendment or adoption of a proposed standard for a given region or group of countries, the quorum of the Commission shall include one third of the Members belonging to the region or group of countries concerned.
RULE VI AGENDA.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO, after consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission or with the Executive Committee, shall prepare a Provisional Agenda for each session of the Commission.
The first item on the Provisional Agenda shall be the adoption of the Agenda.
Any Member of the Commission may request the Directors-General of FAO or WHO to include specific items in the Provisional Agenda.
The Provisional Agenda shall be circulated by the Directors-General of FAO or WHO to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the opening of the session.
Any Member of the Commission, and the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, may, after the dispatch of the Provisional Agenda, propose the inclusion of specific items in the Agenda with respect to matters of an urgent nature. These items shall be placed on a supplementary list, which, if time permits before the opening of the session, shall be dispatched by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO to all Members of the Commission, failing which the supplementary list shall be communicated to the Chairperson for submission to the Commission.
No items included in the Agenda by the governing bodies or the DirectorsGeneral of FAO and WHO shall be deleted therefrom. After the Agenda has been adopted, the Commission may, by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, amend the Agenda by the deletion, addition or modification of any other item.
Documents to be submitted to the Commission at any session shall be furnished by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO to all Members of the Commission, to the other eligible Nations attending the session as observers and to the non-member nations and international organizations invited as observers thereto, in principle at least two months prior to the session at which they are to be discussed.
RULE VII VOTING AND PROCEDURES.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Rule, each Member of the Commission shall have one vote. An alternate or adviser shall not have the right to vote except where substituting for the representative.
Except as otherwise provided in these rules, decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast.
At the request of a majority of the Members of the Commission constituting a given region or a group of countries that a standard be elaborated, the standard concerned shall be elaborated as a standard primarily intended for that region or group of countries. When a vote is taken on the elaboration, amendment or adoption of a draft standard primarily intended for a region or group of countries, only Members belonging to that region or group of countries may take part in the voting. The adoption of the standard may, however, take place only after submission of the draft text to all Members of the Commission for comments. The provisions of this paragraph shall not prejudice the elaboration or adoption of a corresponding standard with a different territorial scope.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Rule and paragraph 2 of Rule XI, any Member of the Commission may request a roll-call vote, in which case the vote of each Member shall be recorded.
Elections shall be decided by secret ballot, except that, where the number of candidates does not exceed the number of vacancies, the Chairperson may submit to the Commission that the election be decided by clear general consent. Any other matter shall be decided by secret ballot if the Commission so determines.
Formal proposals relating to items of the Agenda and amendments thereto shall be introduced in writing and handed to the Chairperson, who shall circulate them to representatives of Members of the Commission.
The provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of FAO shall apply mutatis mutandis to all matters which are not specifically dealt with under Rule VII of the present Rules.
RULE VIII OBSERVERS.
Any Member Nation and any Associate Member of FAO or WHO which is not a Member of the Commission but has a special interest in the work of the Commission, may, upon request communicated to the Director-General of FAO or WHO, attend sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies as an.
observer. It may submit memoranda and participate without vote in the discussion.
Nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of FAO or WHO, are Members of the United Nations, may, upon their request and subject to the provisions relating to the granting of observer status to nations adopted by the Conference of FAO and the World Health Assembly, be invited to attend in an observer capacity sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies. The status of nations invited to such sessions shall be governed by the relevant provisions adopted by the Conference of FAO.
Any Member of the Commission may attend as an observer the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and may submit memoranda and participate without vote in the discussions.
Subject to the provisions of Rule VIII.5 the Directors-General of FAO or WHO may invite intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations to attend as observers sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies.
Participation of international organizations in the work of the Commission, and the relations between the Commission and such organizations shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Constitutions of FAO or WHO, as well as by the applicable regulations of FAO or WHO on relations with international organizations; such relations shall be handled by the DirectorGeneral of FAO or of WHO as appropriate.
RULE IX RECORDS AND REPORTS.
At each session the Commission shall approve a report embodying its views, recommendations and conclusions, including when requested a statement of minority views. Such other records for its own use as the Commission may on occasion decide shall also be maintained.
The report of the Commission shall be transmitted to the Directors-General of FAO and WHO at the close of each session, who shall circulate it to the Members of the Commission, to other countries and to organizations that were represented at the session, for their information, and upon request to other Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO.
Recommendations of the Commission having policy, programme or financial implications for FAO and/or WHO shall be brought by the DirectorsGeneral to the attention of the governing bodies of FAO and/or WHO for appropriate action.
Subject to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the DirectorsGeneral of FAO and WHO may request Members of the Commission to supply the Commission with information on action taken on the basis of recommendations made by the Commission.
RULE X SUBSIDIARY BODIES.
The Commission may establish the following types of subsidiary bodies: (a) subsidiary bodies which it deems necessary for the accomplishment of its work in the finalization of draft standards; (b) subsidiary bodies in the form of: (i) Codex Committees for the preparation of draft standards for submission to the Commission, whether intended for worldwide use, for a given region or for a group of countries specifically enumerated by the Commission.
(ii) Coordinating Committees for regions or groups of countries which shall exercise general coordination in the preparation of standards relating to such regions or groups of countries and such other functions as may be entrusted to them.
Subject to paragraph 3 below, membership in these subsidiary bodies shall consist, as may be determined by the Commission, either of such Members of the Commission as have notified the Directors-General of FAO or WHO of their desire to be considered as Members thereof, or of selected Members designated by the Commission.
Membership of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) for the preparation of draft standards intended primarily for a region or group of countries, shall be open only to Members of the Commission belonging to such a region or group of countries.
Representatives of members of subsidiary bodies shall, insofar as possible, serve in a continuing capacity and shall be specialists active in the fields of the respective subsidiary bodies.
Subsidiary bodies may only be established by the Commission except where otherwise provided in these Rules. Their terms of reference and reporting procedures shall be determined by the Commission, except where otherwise provided in these Rules.
Sessions of subsidiary bodies shall be convened by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO:.
(a) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(a), in consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission; (b) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) (Codex Committees), in consultation with the chairperson of the respective Codex Committee and also, in the case of Codex Committees for the preparation of draft standards for a given region or group of countries, with the Coordinator, if a Coordinator has been appointed for the region or group of countries concerned; (c) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(ii) (Coordinating Committees), in consultation with the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall determine the place of meeting of bodies established under Rule X.1(a) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) after consultation, where appropriate, with the host country concerned and, in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(ii), after consultation with the Coordinator for the region or group of countries concerned, if any.
Notice of the date and place of each session of bodies established under Rule X.1(a) shall be communicated to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the session.
The establishment of subsidiary bodies under Rule X.1(a) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) shall be subject to the availability of the necessary funds, as shall the establishment of subsidiary bodies under Rule X.1(b)(i) when any of their expenses are proposed to be recognized as operating expenses within the budget of the Commission in accordance with Article 10 of the Statutes of the Commission. Before taking any decision involving expenditure in connection with the establishment of such subsidiary bodies, the Commission shall have before it a report from the Director-General of FAO and/or WHO, as appropriate, on the administrative and financial implications thereof. 10. The Members who shall be responsible for appointing Chairpersons of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) shall be designated at each session by the Commission, except where otherwise provided in these Rules, and shall be eligible for re-designation. All other officers of subsidiary bodies shall be elected by the body concerned and shall be eligible for re-election. 11. The Rules of Procedure of the Commission shall apply mutatis mutandis to its subsidiary bodies.
RULE XI ELABORATION AND ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.
Subject to the provisions of these Rules of Procedure, the Commission may establish the procedures for the elaboration of world-wide standards and of standards for a given region or group of countries, and, when necessary, amend such procedures.
The Commission shall make every effort to reach agreement on the adoption or amendment of standards by consensus. Decisions to adopt or amend standards may be taken by voting only if such efforts to reach consensus have failed.
RULE XII BUDGET AND EXPENSES.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall prepare for consideration by the Commission at its regular sessions an estimate of expenditure based on the proposed programme of work of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies, together with information concerning expenditures for the previous financial period. This estimate, with such modifications as may be considered appropriate by the Directors-General in the light of recommendations made by the Commission, shall subsequently be incorporated in the Regular Budgets of the two Organizations for approval by the appropriate governing bodies.
The estimate of expenditure shall make provisions for the operating expenses of the Commission and the subsidiary bodies of the Commission established under Rule X.1(a) and X.1(b)(ii) and for the expenses relating to staff assigned to the Programme and other expenditures incurred in connection with the servicing of the latter.
The operating costs of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) (Codex Committees) shall be borne by each Member accepting the Chair of such a body. The estimate of expenditure may include a provision for such costs involved in preparatory work as may be recognized as operating expenses of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of the Statutes of the Commission.
Expenses incurred in connection with attendance at sessions of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies and travel of delegations of the Members of the Commission and of observers referred to in Rule VIII, shall be borne by the governments or organizations concerned. Should experts be invited by the Directors-General of FAO or WHO to attend sessions of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies in their individual capacity, their expenses shall be borne out of the regular budgetary funds available for the work of the Commission.
RULE XIII LANGUAGES.
The languages of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies set up under Rule X.1(a) shall be not less than three of the working languages, as shall be determined by the Commission, which are working languages both of FAO and of the Health Assembly of WHO.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 above, other languages which are working languages either of FAO or of the Health Assembly of WHO may be added by the Commission if (a) the Commission has before it a report from the Directors-General of FAO and WHO on the policy, financial and administrative implications of the addition of such languages; and (b) the addition of such languages has the approval of the DirectorsGeneral of FAO and WHO.
Where a representative wishes to use a language other than a language of the Commission he shall himself provide the necessary interpretation and/or translation into one of the languages of the Commission.
Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Rule, the languages of subsidiary bodies set up under Rule X.1(b) shall include at least two of the languages of the Commission.
RULE XIV AMENDMENTS AND SUSPENSION OF RULES.
Amendments of or additions to these Rules may be adopted by a two thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that 24 hours' notice of the proposal for the amendment or addition has been given. Amendments of or additions to these Rules shall come into force upon approval by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, subject to such confirmation as may be prescribed by the procedures of the two Organizations.
The Rules of the Commission, other than Rule I, Rule III.1, 2, 3 and 6, Rule IV, Rule V.2 and 6, Rule VI.1, 4 and 6, Rule VII.1, 2 and 3, Rule VIII, Rule IX.3 and 4, Rule X.5, 7 and 9, Rule XII, Rule XIV and Rule XV, may be suspended by the Commission by a two thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that 24 hours' notice of the proposal for suspension has been given. Such notice may be waived if no representative of the Members of the Commission objects.
RULE XV ENTRY INTO FORCE.
In accordance with Article 8 of the Statutes of the Commission, these Rules of Procedure shall come into force upon approval by the Directors17.
General of FAO and WHO, subject to such confirmation as may be prescribed by the procedures of the two Organizations. Pending the coming into force of these Rules, they shall apply provisionally.
Elaboration procedures.
PROCEDURES FOR THE ELABORATION OF CODEX STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS.
Note: Throughout this text the word "Standard" is meant to include any of the recommendations of the Commission intended to be submitted to Governments for acceptance. Except for provisions relating to acceptance, the Procedures apply mutatis mutandis to codes of practice and other texts of an advisory nature.
INTRODUCTION.
The full procedure for the elaboration of Codex standards is as follows. The Commission decides, taking into account the "Criteria for the Establishment of Work Priorities", that a standard should be elaborated and also which subsidiary body or other body should undertake the work. Decisions to elaborate standards may also be taken by subsidiary bodies of the Commission in accordance with the above-mentioned criteria subject to subsequent approval by the Commission or its Executive Committee at the earliest possible opportunity. The Secretariat arranges for the preparation of a "proposed draft standard" which is circulated to governments for comments and is then considered in the light of these by the subsidiary body concerned which may present the text to the Commission as a "draft standard". If the Commission adopts the "draft standard" it is sent to governments for further comments and in the light of these and after further consideration by the subsidiary body concerned, the Commission reconsiders the draft and may adopt it as a "Codex standard". The procedure is described in Part 1 of this document.
The Commission or the Executive Committee, or any subsidiary body, subject to the confirmation of the Commission or the Executive Committee may decide that the urgency of elaborating a Codex standard is such that an accelerated elaboration procedure should be followed. While taking this decision, all appropriate matters shall be taken into consideration, including the likelihood of new scientific information becoming available in the immediate future. The accelerated elaboration procedure is described in Part 2 of this document.
The Commission or the subsidiary body or other body concerned may decide that the draft be returned for further work at any appropriate previous Step in the Procedure. The Commission may also decide that the draft be held at Step 8.
The Commission may authorize, on the basis of two-thirds majority of votes cast, the omission of Steps 6 and 7, where such an omission is recommended by the Codex Committee entrusted with the elaboration of the draft. Recommendations to omit steps shall be notified to Members and interested international organizations as soon as possible after the session of the Codex Committee concerned. When formulating recommendations to omit Steps 6 and 7, Codex Committees shall take all appropriate matters into consideration, including the need for urgency, and the likelihood of new scientific information becoming available in the immediate future.
The Commission may at any stage in the elaboration of a standard entrust any of the remaining Steps to a Codex Committee or other body different from that to which it was previously entrusted.
It will be for the Commission itself to keep under review the revision of "Codex standards". The procedure for revision should, mutatis mutandis, be that laid down for the elaboration of Codex standards, except that the Commission may decide to omit any other step or steps of that Procedure where, in its opinion, an amendment proposed by a Codex Committee is either of an editorial nature or of a substantive nature but consequential to provisions in similar standards adopted by the Commission at Step.
7. Codex standards are published and governments are invited to notify the Commission's Secretariat of the status or use of the Codex standard in accordance with their established legal and administrative procedures. They are also sent to international organizations to which competence in the matter has been transferred by their Member States. See Part 3 of this document. Details of notifications are published periodically by the Commission's Secretariat.
PART 1: UNIFORM PROCEDURE FOR THE ELABORATION OF CODEX STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS.
Steps 1, 2 and 3 (1) The Commission decides, taking into account the "Criteria for the Establishment of Work Priorities", to elaborate a World-wide Codex Standard and also decides which subsidiary body or other body should undertake the work. A decision to elaborate a World-wide Codex Standard may also be taken by subsidiary bodies of the Commission in accordance with the above mentioned criteria, subject to subsequent approval by the Commission or its Executive Committee at the earliest possible opportunity. In the case of Codex Regional Standards, the Commission shall base its decision on the proposal of the majority of Members belonging to a given region or group of countries submitted at a session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
(2) The Secretariat arranges for the preparation of a proposed draft standard. In the case of Maximum Limits for Residues of Pesticides or Veterinary Drugs, the Secretariat distributes the recommendations for maximum limits, when available from the Joint Meetings of the FAO Panel of Experts on Pesticide Residues in Food and the Environment and the WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), or the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). In the cases of milk and milk products or individual standards for cheeses, the Secretariat distributes the recommendations of the International Dairy Federation (IDF). (3) The proposed draft standard is sent to Members of the Commission and interested international organizations for comment on all aspects including possible implications of the proposed draft standard for their economic interests. Step 4 The comments received are sent by the Secretariat to the subsidiary body or other body concerned which has the power to consider such comments and to amend the proposed draft standard. Step 5 The proposed draft standard is submitted through the Secretariat to the Commission or to the Executive Committee with a view to its adoption as a draft standard.3 In taking any decision at this step, the Commission or the Executive Committee will give due consideration to any comments that may be submitted by any of its Members regarding the implications which the proposed draft standard or any provisions thereof may have for their economic interests. In the case of Regional Standards, all Members of the Commission may present their comments, take part in the debate and propose amendments, but only the majority of the Members of the region or group of countries concerned attending the session can decide to amend or adopt the draft. In taking any decisions at this step, the Members of the region or group of countries concerned will give due consideration to any comments that may be submitted by any of the Members of the Commission regarding the implications which the proposed draft standard or any provisions thereof may have for their economic interests.
Without prejudice to any decision that may be taken by the Commission at Step 5, the proposed draft standard may be sent by the Secretariat for government comments prior to its consideration at Step 5, when, in the opinion of the subsidiary body or other body concerned, the time between the relevant session of the Commission and the subsequent session of the subsidiary body or other body concerned requires such action in order to advance the work. 21.
Step 6 The draft standard is sent by the Secretariat to all Members and interested international organizations for comment on all aspects, including possible implications of the draft standard for their economic interests. Step 7 The comments received are sent by the Secretariat to the subsidiary body or other body concerned, which has the power to consider such comments and amend the draft standard. Step 8 The draft standard is submitted through the Secretariat to the Commission together with any written proposals received from Members and interested international organizations for amendments at Step 8 with a view to its adoption as a Codex standard. In the case of Regional standards, all Members and interested international organizations may present their comments, take part in the debate and propose amendments but only the majority of Members of the region or group of countries concerned attending the session can decide to amend and adopt the draft.
PART 2: UNIFORM ACCELERATED PROCEDURE FOR THE ELABORATION OF CODEX STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS.
Steps 1, 2 and 3 (1) The Commission or the Executive Committee between Commission sessions, on the basis of a two-thirds majority of votes cast, taking into account the "Criteria for the Establishment of Work Priorities", shall identify those standards which shall be the subject of an accelerated elaboration process.4 The identification of such standards may also be made by subsidiary bodies of the Commission, on the basis of a two-thirds majority of votes cast, subject to confirmation at the earliest opportunity by the Commission or its Executive Committee by a two-thirds majority of votes cast. (2) The Secretariat arranges for the preparation of a proposed draft standard. In the case of Maximum Limits for Residues of Pesticides or Veterinary Drugs,.
Relevant considerations could include, but need not be limited to, matters concerning new scientific information; new technology(ies); urgent problems related to trade or public health; or the revision or up-dating of existing standards.
the Secretariat distributes the recommendations for maximum limits, when available from the Joint Meetings of the FAO Panel of Experts on Pesticide Residues in Food and the Environment and the WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), or the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). In the cases of milk and milk products or individual standards for cheeses, the Secretariat distributes the recommendations of the International Dairy Federation (IDF). (3) The proposed draft standard is sent to Members of the Commission and interested international organizations for comment on all aspects including possible implications of the proposed draft standard for their economic interests. When standards are subject to an accelerated procedure, this fact shall be notified to the Members of the Commission and the interested international organizations. Step 4 The comments received are sent by the Secretariat to the subsidiary body or other body concerned which has the power to consider such comments and to amend the proposed draft standard. Step 5 In the case of standards identified as being subject to an accelerated elaboration procedure, the draft standard is submitted through the Secretariat to the Commission together with any written proposals received from Members and interested international organizations for amendments with a view to its adoption as a Codex standard. In taking any decision at this step, the Commission will give due consideration to any comments that may be submitted by any of its Members regarding the implications which the proposed draft standard or any provisions thereof may have for their economic interests.
PART 3: SUBSEQUENT PROCEDURE CONCERNING PUBLICATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF CODEX STANDARDS.
The Codex standard is published and issued to all Member States and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO and to the international organizations concerned. Members of the Commission and international organizations to which competence in the matter has been transferred by their Member States notify the Secretariat of the status or use of the Codex standard in accordance with the notification acceptance procedure set out in paragraph 4, paragraph 5 or paragraph 6 of the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius, whichever is appropriate. Member States and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO.
that are not Members of the Commission are also invited to notify the Secretariat if they wish to accept the Codex standard. The Secretariat publishes periodically details of notifications received from governments and from international organizations to which competence in the matter has been transferred by their Member States with respect to the acceptance or otherwise of Codex standards and in addition to this information an appendix for each Codex standard (a) listing the countries in which products conforming with such standard may be freely distributed, and (b) where applicable, stating in detail all specified deviations which may have been declared in respect to acceptance. The above mentioned publications will constitute the Codex Alimentarius. The Secretariat examines deviations notified by governments and reports periodically to the Codex Alimentarius Commission concerning possible amendments to standards which might be considered by the Commission in accordance with the Procedure for the Revision and Amendment of Recommended Codex Standards.
SUBSEQUENT PROCEDURE CONCERNING PUBLICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF THE STANDARD.
The Codex Regional Standard is published and issued to all Member States and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO and to the international organizations concerned. Members of the region or group of countries concerned notify the Secretariat of the status and use the Codex Regional Standard in accordance with the notification procedure set out in Section 4 of the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius. Other Members of the Commission may likewise notify the Secretariat of their use of the standard or of any other measures they propose to adopt with respect thereto, and also submit any observations as to its application. Member States and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO that are not Members of the Commission are invited to notify the Secretariat of the status or use of the Codex standard. It is open to the Commission to consider at any time the possible extension of the territorial application of a Codex Regional Standard or its conversion into a World-wide Codex Standard in the light of all notifications received.
GUIDE TO THE CONSIDERATION OF STANDARDS AT STEP 8 OF THE PROCEDURE FOR THE ELABORATION OF CODEX STANDARDS INCLUDING CONSIDERATION OF ANY STATEMENTS RELATING TO ECONOMIC IMPACT.
(a) to ensure that the work of the Codex committee concerned is not made less valuable by the passage of an insufficiently considered amendment in the Commission; (b) at the same time to provide scope for significant amendments to be raised and considered in the Commission; (c) to prevent, as far as practicable, lengthy discussion in the Commission on points that have been thoroughly argued in the Codex committee concerned; (d) to ensure, as far as practicable, that delegations are given sufficient warning of amendments so that they may brief themselves adequately, amendments to Codex standards at Step 8 should, as far as practicable, be submitted in writing, although amendments proposed in the Commission would not be excluded entirely, and the following procedure should be employed:.
When Codex standards are distributed to Member Countries prior to their consideration by the Commission at Step 8, the Secretariat will indicate the date by which proposed amendments must be received; this date will be fixed so as to allow sufficient time for such amendments to be in the hands of governments not less than one month before the session of the Commission.
Governments should submit amendments in writing by the date indicated and should state that they had been previously submitted to the appropriate Codex committee with details of the submission of the amendment or should give the reason why the amendment had not been proposed earlier, as the case may be.
When amendments are proposed during a session of the Commission, without prior notice, to a standard which is at Step 8, the Chairperson of the Commission, after consultation with the chairperson of the appropriate committee, or, if the chairperson is not present, with the delegate of the chairing country, or, in the case of subsidiary bodies which do not have a chairing country, with other appropriate persons, shall rule whether such amendments are substantive.
If an amendment ruled as substantive is agreed to by the Commission, it shall be referred to the appropriate Codex committee for its comments and, until such comments have been received and considered by the Commission, the standard shall not be advanced beyond Step 8 of the Procedure.
It will be open to any Member of the Commission to draw to the attention of the Commission any matter concerning the possible implications of a draft standard for its economic interests, including any such matter which has not, in.
that Member's opinion, been satisfactorily resolved at an earlier step in the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards. All the information pertaining to the matter, including the outcome of any previous consideration by the Commission or a subsidiary body thereof should be presented in writing to the Commission, together with any draft amendments to the standard which would in the opinion of the country concerned, take into account the economic implications. In considering statements concerning economic implications the Commission should have due regard to the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius concerning the protection of the health of consumers and the ensuring of fair practices in the food trade, as set forth in the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius, as well as the economic interests of the Member concerned. It will be open to the Commission to take any appropriate action including referring the matter to the appropriate Codex committee for its comments.
GUIDE TO THE PROCEDURE FOR THE REVISION AND AMENDMENT OF CODEX STANDARDS.
Proposals for the amendment or revision of Codex standards should be submitted to the Commission's Secretariat in good time (not less than three months) before the session of the Commission at which they are to be considered. The proposer of an amendment should indicate the reasons for the proposed amendment and should also state whether the proposed amendment had been previously submitted to and considered by the Codex committee concerned and/or the Commission. If the proposed amendment has already been considered by the Codex committee and/or Commission, the outcome of the consideration of the proposed amendment should be stated.
Taking into account such information regarding the proposed amendment as may be supplied in accordance with paragraph 1 above, the Commission will decide whether the amendment or revision of a standard is necessary. If the Commission decides in the affirmative, and the proposer of the amendment is other than a Codex committee, the proposed amendment will be referred for consideration to the appropriate Codex committee, if such committee is still in existence. If such committee is not in existence, the Commission will determine how best to deal with the proposed amendment. If the proposer of the amendment is a Codex committee, it would be open to the Commission to decide that the proposed amendment be circulated to governments for comments prior to further consideration by the sponsoring Codex Committee. In the case of an amendment proposed by a Codex Committee, it will also be open to the Commission to adopt the amendment at Step 5 or Step 8 as appropriate, where in its opinion the amendment is either of an editorial nature or of a substantive nature but consequential to provisions in similar standards adopted by it at Step 8.
The procedure for amending or revising a Codex standard would be as laid down in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Introduction to the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards (see page 19 above).
When the Commission has decided to amend or revise a standard, the unrevised standard will remain the applicable Codex standard until the revised standard has been adopted by the Commission.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE AMENDMENT OF CODEX STANDARDS ELABORATED BY CODEX COMMITTEES WHICH HAVE ADJOURNED SINE.
The need to consider amending or revising adopted Codex standards arises from time to time for a variety of reasons amongst which can be: (a) changes in the evaluation of food additives, pesticides and contaminants; (b) finalization of methods of analysis; (c) editorial amendments of guidelines or other texts adopted by the Commission and related to all or a group of Codex standards e.g. "Guidelines on Date Marking", "Guidelines on Labelling of Non-retail Containers", "Carry-over Principle"; (d) consequential amendments to earlier Codex standards arising from Commission decisions on currently adopted standards of the same type of products; (e) consequential and other amendments arising from either revised or newly elaborated Codex standards and other texts of general applicability which have been referenced in other Codex standards (Revision of General Principles of Food Hygiene, Codex Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods); (f) technological developments or economic considerations e.g. provisions concerning styles, packaging media or other factors related to composition and essential quality criteria and consequential changes in labelling provisions; (g) modifications of standards being proposed following an examination of government notifications of acceptances and specified deviations by the Secretariat as required in accordance with the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex standards i.e. "Subsequent Procedure concerning Publication and Acceptance of Codex Standards", page 24.
The "Guide to the Procedure for the Revision and Amendment of Codex Standards" (see page 26) covers sufficiently amendments to Codex standards which have been elaborated by still active Codex Committees and those mentioned under paragraph 1 (g) above. In the case of amendments proposed to Codex standards elaborated by Codex Committees which have adjourned sine die, the procedure places an obligation on the Commission to "determine how best to deal with the proposed amendment". In order to facilitate consideration of such amendments, in particular, those of the type mentioned in para. 1 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), the Commission has established more detailed guidance within the existing procedure for the amendment and revision of Codex standards.
In the case where Codex committees have adjourned sine die: (a) the Secretariat keeps under review all Codex standards originating from Codex Committees adjourned sine die and to determine the need for any amendments arising from decisions of the Commission, in particular amendments of the type mentioned in para. 1(a), (b), (c), (d) and those of (e) if of an editorial nature. If a need to amend the standard appears appropriate then the Secretariat should prepare a text for adoption in the Commission; (b) amendments of the type in para (f) and those of (e) of a substantive nature, the Secretariat in cooperation with the national secretariat of the adjourned Committee and, if possible, the Chairperson of that Committee, should agree on the need for such an amendment and prepare a working paper containing the wording of a proposed amendment and the reasons for proposing such amendment, and request comments from Member Governments: (a) on the need to proceed with such an amendment and (b) on the proposed amendment itself. If the majority of the replies received from Member Governments is affirmative on both the need to amend the standard and the suitability of the proposed wording for the amendment or an alternative proposed wording, the proposal should be submitted to the Commission with a request to approve the amendment of the standard concerned. In cases where replies do not appear to offer an uncontroversial solution then the Commission should be informed accordingly and it would be for the Commission to determine how best to proceed.
General principles.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS.
PURPOSE OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS.
The Codex Alimentarius is a collection of internationally adopted food standards presented in a uniform manner. These food standards aim at protecting consumers' health and ensuring fair practices in the food trade. The Codex Alimentarius also includes provisions of an advisory nature in the form of codes of practice, guidelines and other recommended measures intended to assist in achieving the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius. The publication of the Codex Alimentarius is intended to guide and promote the elaboration and establishment of definitions and requirements for foods to assist in their harmonization and in doing so to facilitate international trade.
SCOPE OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS.
The Codex Alimentarius includes standards for all the principle foods, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, for distribution to the consumer. Materials for further processing into foods should be included to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius as defined. The Codex Alimentarius includes provisions in respect of food hygiene, food additives, pesticide residues, contaminants, labelling and presentation, methods of analysis and sampling. It also includes provisions of an advisory nature in the form of codes of practice, guidelines and other recommended measures.
NATURE OF CODEX STANDARDS.
Codex standards contain requirements for food aimed at ensuring for the consumer a sound, wholesome food product free from adulteration, correctly labelled and presented. A Codex standard for any food or foods should be drawn up in accordance with the Format for Codex Commodity Standards and contain, as appropriate, the criteria listed therein.
ACCEPTANCE OF CODEX COMMODITY STANDARDS.
4.A. A Codex standard may be accepted by a country in accordance with its established legal and administrative procedures in respect of distribution of the product concerned, whether imported or home produced, within its territorial jurisdiction in the following ways:.
Full acceptance.
(a) Full acceptance means that the country concerned will ensure that a product to which the standard applies will be permitted to be distributed freely, in accordance with (c) below, within its territorial jurisdiction under the name and description laid down in the standard, provided that it complies with all the relevant requirements of the standard. (b) The country will also ensure that products not complying with the standard will not be permitted to be distributed under the name and description laid down in the standard. (c) (c)The distribution of any sound products conforming with the standard will not be hindered by any legal or administrative provisions in the country concerned relating to the health of the consumer or to other food standard matters except for considerations of human, plant or animal health which are not specifically dealt with in the standard. (ii) Acceptance with specified deviations Acceptance with specified deviations means that the country concerned gives acceptance, as defined in paragraph 4.A(i), to the standard with the exception of such deviations as are specified in detail in its declaration of acceptance; it being understood that a product complying with the standard as qualified by these deviations will be permitted to be distributed freely within the territorial jurisdiction of the country concerned. The country concerned will further include in its declaration of acceptance a statement of the reasons for these deviations, and also indicate: (a) whether products fully conforming to the standard may be distributed freely within its territorial jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 4.A(i);.
(b) whether it expects to be able to give full acceptance to the standard and, if so, when. (iii) Free distribution A declaration of free distribution means that the country concerned undertakes that products conforming with a Codex commodity standard may be distributed freely within its territorial jurisdiction insofar as matters covered by the Codex commodity standard are concerned. B. A country which considers that it cannot accept the standard in any of the ways mentioned above should indicate: (i) whether products conforming to the standard may be distributed freely within its territorial jurisdiction;.
(ii) in what ways its present or proposed requirements differ from the standard, and, if possible the reasons for these differences. C. (i) A country which accepts a Codex standard according to one of the provisions of 4.A is responsible for the uniform and impartial application of the provisions of the standard as accepted, in respect of all home-produced and imported products distributed within its territorial jurisdiction. In addition, the country should be prepared to offer advice and guidance to exporters and processors of products for export to promote understanding of and compliance with the requirements of importing countries which have accepted a Codex standard according to one of the provisions of 4.A. (ii) Where, in an importing country, a product claimed to be in compliance with a Codex standard is found not to be in compliance with that standard, whether in respect of the label accompanying the product or otherwise, the importing country should inform the competent authorities in the exporting country of all the relevant facts and in particular the details of the origin of the product in question (name and address of the exporter), if it is thought that a person in the exporting country is responsible for such non-compliance.
ACCEPTANCE OF CODEX GENERAL STANDARDS.
5.A. A Codex general standard may be accepted by a country in accordance with its established legal and administrative procedures in respect of the distribution of products to which the general standard applies, whether imported or home-produced, within its territorial jurisdiction in the following ways: (i) Full acceptance Full acceptance of a general standard means that the country concerned will ensure, within its territorial jurisdiction, that a product to which the general standard applies will comply with all the relevant requirements of the general standard except as otherwise provided in a Codex commodity standard. It also means that the distribution of any sound products conforming with the standard will not be hindered by any legal or administrative provisions in the country concerned, which relate to the health of the consumer or to other food standard matters and which are covered by the requirements of the general standard. (ii) Acceptance with specified deviations Acceptance with specified deviations means that the country concerned gives acceptance, as defined in paragraph 5.A(i), to the general standard with the exception of such deviations as are specified in detail in its declaration of acceptance. The country concerned will further include in its declaration of acceptance a statement of the reasons for these deviations, and also indicate.
whether it expects to be able to give full acceptance to the general standard and, if so, when. (iii) Free distribution A declaration of free distribution means that the country concerned undertakes that products conforming with the relevant requirements of a Codex general standard may be distributed freely within its territorial jurisdiction insofar as matters covered by the Codex general standard are concerned. B. A country which considers that it cannot accept the general standard in any of the ways mentioned above should indicate in what ways its present or proposed requirements differ from the general standard, and if possible, the reasons for these differences. C. (i) A country which accepts a general standard according to one of the provisions of paragraph 5.A is responsible for the uniform and impartial application of the provisions of the standard as accepted, in respect of all home produced and imported products distributed within its territorial jurisdiction. In addition, the country should be prepared to offer advice and guidance to exporters and processors of products for export to promote understanding of and compliance with the requirements of importing countries which have accepted a general standard according to one of the provisions of paragraph 5.A. (ii) Where, in an importing country, a product claimed to be in compliance with a general standard is found not to be in compliance with that standard, whether in respect of the label accompanying the product or otherwise, the importing country should inform the competent authorities in the exporting country of all the relevant facts and in particular the details of the origin of the product in question (name and address of the exporter), if it is thought that a person in the exporting country is responsible for such non-compliance.
ACCEPTANCE OF CODEX MAXIMUM LIMITS FOR RESIDUES OF PESTICIDES AND VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOOD.
6.A. A Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food may be accepted by a country in accordance with its established legal and administrative procedures in respect of the distribution within its territorial jurisdiction of (a) home-produced and imported food or (b) imported food only, to which the Codex maximum limit applies in the ways set forth below. In addition, where a Codex maximum limit applies to a group of foods not individually named, a country accepting such Codex maximum limit in respect of other than the group of foods, shall specify the foods in respect of which the Codex maximum limit is accepted.
Full acceptance of a Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food means that the country concerned will ensure, within its territorial jurisdiction, that a food, whether home-produced or imported, to which the Codex maximum limit applies, will comply with that limit. It also means that the distribution of a food conforming with the Codex maximum limit will not be hindered by any legal or administrative provisions in the country concerned which relate to matters covered by the Codex maximum limit. (ii) Free distribution A declaration of free distribution means that the country concerned undertakes that products conforming with the Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food may be distributed freely within its territorial jurisdiction insofar as matters covered by the Codex maximum limit are concerned. B. A country which considers that it cannot accept the Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in foods in any of the ways mentioned above should indicate in what ways its present or proposed requirements differ from the Codex maximum limit and, if possible, the reasons for these differences. C. A country which accepts a Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food according to one of the provisions of paragraph 6.A should be prepared to offer advice and guidance to exporters and processors of food for export to promote understanding of and compliance with the requirements of importing countries which have accepted a Codex maximum limit according to one of the provisions of paragraph 6.A. D. Where, in an importing country, a food claimed to be in compliance with a Codex maximum limit is found not to be in compliance with the Codex maximum limit, the importing country should inform the competent authorities in the exporting country of all the relevant facts and, in particular, the details of the origin of the food in question (name and address of the exporter), if it is thought that a person in the exporting country is responsible for such noncompliance.
WITHDRAWAL OR AMENDMENT OF ACCEPTANCE.
The withdrawal or amendment of acceptance of a Codex standard or a Codex maximum limit for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food by a country shall be notified in writing to the Codex Alimentarius Commission's Secretariat who will inform all Member States and Associate Members of FAO and WHO of the notification and its date of receipt. The country concerned.
should provide the information required under paragraphs 4.A(iii), 5.A(iii), 4.B, 5.B or 6.B above, whichever is appropriate. It should also give as long a notice of the withdrawal or amendment as is practicable.
REVISION OF CODEX STANDARDS.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission and its subsidiary bodies are committed to revision as necessary of Codex standards and related texts to ensure that they are consistent with and reflect current scientific knowledge and other relevant information. When required, a standard or related text shall be revised or removed using the same procedures as followed for the elaboration of a new standard. Each member of the Codex Alimentarius Commission is responsible for identifying, and presenting to the appropriate committee, any new scientific and other relevant information which may warrant revision of any existing Codex standards or related texts.
Guidelines for acceptance.
GUIDELINES FOR THE ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE FOR CODEX STANDARDS.
THE IMPORTANCE OF A RESPONSE TO EVERY NOTIFICATION.
The Codex Alimentarius is the record of Codex Standards and of acceptances or other notifications by Member Countries or international organizations to which competence in the matter has been transferred by their Member States. It is revised regularly to take account of the issue of new or amended standards and the receipt of notifications. It is important that governments respond to every issue of new or amended standards. Governments should aim at giving formal acceptance to the standards. If acceptance or free circulation cannot be given unconditionally, the deviations or conditions, and the reasons, can be included in the response. Early and regular responses will ensure that the Codex Alimentarius can be kept up to date so as to serve as an indispensable reference for governments and international traders.
Governments should ensure that the information in the Codex Alimentarius reflects the up to date position. When changing national laws or practices the need for a notification to the Codex Secretariat should always be kept in mind.
The Codex procedure for elaboration of standards enables governments to participate at all stages. Governments should be able to make an early response to the issue of a Codex standard and should do their utmost to be ready to do so.
THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS: NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR, OR ALTERNATIVE.
TO, REFERRING TO NATIONAL LEGISLATION.
Every country's laws and administrative procedures contain provisions which it is essential to understand and comply with. It is usually the practice to take steps to obtain copies of relevant legislation and/or to obtain professional advice about compliance. The Codex Alimentarius is a comparative record of the substantive similarities and differences between Codex Standards and corresponding national legislation. The Codex Standard will not normally deal with general matters of human, plant or animal health or with trade marks. The language which is required on labels will be a matter for national legislation and so will import licences and other administrative procedures.
The responses by governments should show clearly which provisions of the Codex Standard are identical to, similar to or different from, the related national requirements. General statements that national laws must be complied.
with should be avoided or accompanied by details of national provisions which require attention. Judgement will sometimes be required where the national law is in a different form or where it has different provisions.
OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE.
The obligations which a country undertakes under the acceptance procedure are included in paragraph 4 of the General Principles. Paragraph 4.A(i)(a) provides for free distribution of conforming products, 4.A(i)(b) with the need to ensure that products which do not conform may not be distributed "under the name and description laid down". Paragraph 4.A(i)(c) is a general requirement not to hinder the distribution of sound products, except for matters relating to human, plant or animal health, not specifically dealt with in the standard. Similar provisions are included in Acceptance with Specified Deviations.
The essential difference between acceptances and notifications of free distribution is that a country which accepts, undertakes to enforce the Codex standard and to accept all the obligations set out in the General Principles subject to any specified deviations.
The Codex Committee on General Principles (CCGP) and the Commission (CAC) have reviewed the acceptance procedure and notifications by governments on a number of occasions. While recognizing that difficulties can arise from time to time in reconciling the obligations of the acceptance procedure with the laws and administrative procedures of a Member Country, the CCGP and the CAC have determined that the obligations are essential to the work and status of the CAC and that they should not be weakened in any way. The purpose of these guidelines therefore is to assist governments when they are considering how, in the light of the objectives of the acceptance procedure, to respond to Codex Standards.
THE RETURN OF THE RESPONSE.
The principal decision which is required is whether to notify an acceptance according to one of the methods prescribed, or non acceptance as provided for in 4.B. Free distribution (4.A(iii)) does not carry with it the obligation to prevent non conforming products from being circulated, and it may be useful in cases where there is no corresponding national standard and no intention to introduce one.
THE NEED FOR AN INFORMED, RESPONSIBLE JUDGEMENT WHEN COMPARING THE CODEX STANDARD WITH NATIONAL LAWS.
10. There will be some occasions when the detail in the Codex Standard is identical with national laws. Difficulties will arise however when national laws are in a different form, contain different figures or no figures at all, or in cases where there may be no standard in the country which corresponds in substance to the Codex Standard. The authority responsible for notifying the response to the CAC is urged to do its best to overcome any such difficulties by the exercise of its best endeavours and to respond, after such consultations as may be appropriate with the national organizations. The grounds on which the judgement has been based can be made clear in the notification. It may well be that they will not be such as to justify an acceptance, because of the obligations to stop the distribution of non conforming products, but a statement of free circulation should be possible on the basis of the facts and practices of each case. If there was a court decision or change in the law or practice subsequently, an amending response should be made.
PRESUMPTIVE STANDARDS.
11. A presumptive standard is one which is assumed to be the standard in the absence of any other. (A presumption in law is the assumption of the truth of anything until the contrary is proved.) Some countries have said that a Codex MRL is the presumptive limit for a pesticide residue. Countries may be able and willing to regard a Codex Standard as the presumptive standard in cases where there is no corresponding standard, code of practice or other accepted expression of the "nature, substance or quality" of the food. A country need not apply the presumption to all the provisions of the standard if the details of its additives, contaminants, hygiene or labelling rules are different from those in the standard. In such a case the provisions in the Codex Standard defining the description, essential composition and quality factors relating to the specified name and description could still be the presumptive standard for those matters. 12. The justification for regarding the Codex Standard as a presumptive standard is the fact that it is the minimum standard for a food elaborated in the CAC "so as to ensure a sound, wholesome product free from adulteration, correctly labelled and presented". (General Principles, Paragraph 3.) The word minimum does not have any pejorative connotations: it simply means the level of quality and soundness of a product judged by consensus to be appropriate for trade internationally and nationally. 13. Whether a presumptive standard would merit an acceptance would depend on whether the country concerned could say that non conforming products could not be distributed under the same name and description laid down in the.
standard. However it would enable a declaration of free circulation to be made and countries are asked to give the idea serious consideration.
FORMAT AND CONTENT OF CODEX STANDARDS.
SCOPE 14. This section, together with the name of the standard and the name and description laid down in the labelling section, should be examined in order to assess whether the obligations of the acceptance procedure can properly be accepted. DESCRIPTION, ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS 15. These sections will define the minimum standard for the food. They will be the most difficult to address unless by chance the details are virtually identical (i.e. ignoring significant matters of editorial expression or format). However, a country which has taken part in the elaboration of the standard either by attending the meetings or by sending comments under the Step Procedure has, no doubt, consulted national organizations on the extent to which the draft provisions in the standard would be acceptable nationally. This factual information needs to be turned into a formal response when the standard is sent out for acceptance. Countries are asked to do their best to exercise an informal judgement on lines discussed in Paragraph 7 above. Some of the quality criteria e.g. allowances for defects may represent good manufacturing practice or be left to trade contracts. This will have to be taken into account. A free distribution response ought to be possible in most cases. FOOD ADDITIVES 16. The food additives included in the standard have been assessed and cleared by JECFA. The Commodity Committee and the CCFAC have assessed technological need and safety in use. If national laws are different, all the detailed differences should be reported. It should be borne in mind, however, that the aim of international food standardization work is to harmonize policies and attitudes as much as possible. Therefore every effort should be made to keep deviations to the minimum. CONTAMINANTS 17. If national limits apply they should be quoted if not the same as those laid down in the Codex Standard. Where general laws about safety, health or nature of the food apply, the limits quoted in the standard could properly be regarded as representing those which are unavoidable in practice and within safety limits.
HYGIENE AND WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 18. If national requirements are different they should be reported. LABELLING 19. The General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods represents the international consensus on information to be included on the labels of all foods. 20. Governments are exhorted to use the General Standard as a basis for their national legislation and to keep differences to an absolute minimum especially those of detail or minutiae. Governments should observe the footnote to the Scope section and should ensure that all compulsory provisions relating to presentation of information which are additional to, and different from, those in the standard should be notified. Any other compulsory provisions in national legislation should also be notified if they are not provided for in the Codex standard. The labelling provisions in Codex standards include sections of the revised General Standard by reference. When accepting a Codex commodity standard, a country which has already accepted and responded to the General Standard can then refer to the terms of that acceptance in any subsequent responses. As much specific information as is relevant and helpful should be given. In particular, this should include the name and description relating to the food, the interpretation of any special requirements relating to the law or custom of the country, any additional details about presentation of the mandatory information and detailed differences if any in the labelling requirements e.g. in relation to class names, declaration of added water, declaration of origin. It will be assumed that the language(s) in which the particulars should be given will be as indicated by national legislation or custom. METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING 21. The obligations which a country assumes in accepting the following Codex Defining Methods of Analysis included in Codex standards are as follows5: (a) Codex Defining Methods of Analysis (Type I) are subject to acceptance by governments just as are the provisions which they define and which form part of Codex standards.
The Committee on General Principles, when elaborating these Guidelines, noted that the Classification of Methods was under review by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling and that the application of Part (b) particularly could be unnecessarily restrictive. 39.
"Full acceptance" of a Codex Defining Method means the acceptance that the value provided for in a Codex standard is defined by means of the Codex method. In determining compliance with the value in the Codex standard, governments undertake to use the Codex Defining Method, especially in cases of disputes involving the results of analysis. "Non acceptance" of Codex Defining Method or acceptance of Codex standards with substantive deviations in the Codex Defining Methods means acceptance of the Codex standard with specified deviation. (b) The "acceptance" of Codex standards containing Codex Reference Methods of Analysis (Type II) means the recognition that Codex Reference Methods are methods the reliability of which has been demonstrated on the basis of internationally acceptable criteria. They are, therefore, obligatory for use, i.e. subject to acceptance by governments, in disputes involving the results of analysis. "Non acceptance" of the Codex Reference Method or acceptance of Codex standards with substantive deviations in the Codex Reference Methods for use in disputes involving methods of analysis, should be taken to mean acceptance of the Codex standard with specified deviation. (c) The "acceptance" of Codex standards containing Codex Alternative Approved Methods of Analysis (Type III) means the recognition that Codex Alternative Approved Methods are methods the reliability of which has been demonstrated in terms of internationally acceptable criteria. They are recommended for use in food control, inspection or for regulatory purposes. "Non acceptance" of a Codex Alternative Approved Method does not constitute a deviation from the Codex standard. (d) Since the reliability of the Tentative Methods (Type IV) has not yet been endorsed by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling on the basis of the internationally accepted criteria, it follows that they cannot be regarded as final Codex methods. Type IV methods may, eventually become Type I, II or III methods with the resultant implications regarding the acceptance of Codex methods. Type IV methods are, therefore, not recommended as Codex methods until their reliability has been recognized by the CCMAS. They may be included in draft Codex standards or in Codex standards provided their non approved status is clearly indicated.
22. Governments are urged to respond to every issue of Codex standards. The inclusion of responses in the Codex Alimentarius will enable the CAC and Member Governments to address the question of closer approximation of international and national requirements. Governments are urged to take the Codex standard fully into consideration when changing their national laws. The Codex Alimentarius will always be an invaluable reference for governments and for international traders although national legislation must always be consulted and complied with.
Working principles for risk analysis.
WORKING PRINCIPLES FOR RISK ANALYSIS FOR APPLICATION IN THE FRAMEWORK OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS.
These principles for risk analysis are intended for application in the framework of the Codex Alimentarius.
The objective of these Working Principles is to provide guidance to the Codex Alimentarius Commission and the joint FAO/WHO expert bodies and consultations, so that food safety and health aspects of Codex standards and related texts are based on risk analysis.
Within the framework of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and its procedures, the responsibility for providing advice on risk management lies with the Commission and its subsidiary bodies (risk managers), while the responsibility for risk assessment lies primarily with the joint FAO/WHO expert bodies and consultations (risk assessors).
RISK ANALYSIS - GENERAL ASPECTS.
The risk analysis used in Codex should be: applied consistently; open, transparent and documented; conducted in accordance with both the Statements of Principle Concerning the Role of Science in the Codex Decision-Making Process and the Extent to Which Other Factors are Taken into Account and the Statements of Principle Relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment; and evaluated and reviewed as appropriate in the light of newly generated scientific data.
The risk analysis should follow a structured approach comprising the three distinct but closely linked components of risk analysis (risk assessment, risk management and risk communication) as defined by the Codex Alimentarius Commission6, each component being integral to the overall risk analysis.
See Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms Related to Food Safety, page 51.
The three components of risk analysis should be documented fully and systematically in a transparent manner. While respecting legitimate concerns to preserve confidentiality, documentation should be accessible to all interested parties7.
Effective communication and consultation with all interested parties should be ensured throughout the risk analysis.
The three components of risk analysis should be applied within an overarching framework for management of food related risks to human health.
There should be a functional separation of risk assessment and risk management, in order to ensure the scientific integrity of the risk assessment, to avoid confusion over the functions to be performed by risk assessors and risk managers and to reduce any conflict of interest. However, it is recognized that risk analysis is an iterative process, and interaction between risk managers and risk assessors is essential for practical application. 10. When there is evidence that a risk to human health exists but scientific data are insufficient or incomplete, the Codex Alimentarius Commission should not proceed to elaborate a standard but should consider elaborating a related text, such as a code of practice, provided that such a text would be supported by the available scientific evidence. 11. Precaution is an inherent element of risk analysis. Many sources of uncertainty exist in the process of risk assessment and risk management of food related hazards to human health. The degree of uncertainty and variability in the available scientific information should be explicitly considered in the risk analysis. Where there is sufficient scientific evidence to allow Codex to proceed to elaborate a standard or related text, the assumptions used for the risk assessment and the risk management options selected should reflect the degree of uncertainty and the characteristics of the hazard. 12. The needs and situations of developing countries should be specifically identified and taken into account by the responsible bodies in the different stages of the risk analysis.
RISK ASSESSMENT POLICY.
13. Determination of risk assessment policy should be included as a specific component of risk management.
For the purpose of the present document, the term "interested parties" refers to "risk assessors, risk managers, consumers, industry, the academic community and, as appropriate, other relevant parties and their representative organizations" (see definition of "Risk Communication") 43.
14. Risk assessment policy should be established by risk managers in advance of risk assessment, in consultation with risk assessors and all other interested parties. This procedure aims at ensuring that the risk assessment is systematic, complete, unbiased and transparent. 15. The mandate given by risk managers to risk assessors should be as clear as possible. 16. Where necessary, risk managers should ask risk assessors to evaluate the potential changes in risk resulting from different risk management options.
RISK ASSESSMENT8.
17. The scope and purpose of the particular risk assessment being carried out should be clearly stated and in accordance with risk assessment policy. The output form and possible alternative outputs of the risk assessment should be defined 18. Experts responsible for risk assessment should be selected in a transparent manner on the basis of their expertise, experience, and their independence with regard to the interests involved. The procedures used to select these experts should be documented including a public declaration of any potential conflict of interest. This declaration should also identify and detail their individual expertise, experience and independence. Expert bodies and consultations should ensure effective participation of experts from different parts of the world, including experts from developing countries. 19. Risk assessment should be conducted in accordance with the Statements of Principle Relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment and should incorporate the four steps of the risk assessment, i.e. hazard identification, hazard characterization, exposure assessment and risk characterization. 20. Risk assessment should be based on all available scientific data. It should use available quantitative information to the greatest extent possible. Risk assessment may also take into account qualitative information. 21. Risk assessment should take into account relevant production, storage and handling practices used throughout the food chain including traditional practices, methods of analysis, sampling and inspection and the prevalence of specific adverse health effects.
Reference is made to the Statements of Principle Relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment: See Appendix: General Decisions of the Commission, page 183.
22. Risk assessment should seek and incorporate relevant data from different parts of the world, including that from developing countries. These data should particularly include epidemiological surveillance data, analytical and exposure data. Where relevant data are not available from developing countries, the Commission should request that FAO/WHO initiate time-bound studies for this purpose. The conduct of the risk assessment should not be inappropriately delayed pending receipt of these data; however, the risk assessment should be reconsidered when such data are available. 23. Constraints, uncertainties and assumptions having an impact on the risk assessment should be explicitly considered at each step in the risk assessment and documented in a transparent manner. Expression of uncertainty or variability in risk estimates may be qualitative or quantitative, but should be quantified to the extent that is scientifically achievable. 24. Risk assessments should be based on realistic exposure scenarios, with consideration of different situations being defined by risk assessment policy. They should include consideration of susceptible and high-risk population groups. Acute, chronic (including long-term), cumulative and/or combined adverse health effects should be taken into account in carrying out risk assessment, where relevant. 25. The report of the risk assessment should indicate any constraints, uncertainties, assumptions and their impact on the risk assessment. Minority opinions should also be recorded. The responsibility for resolving the impact of uncertainty on the risk management decision lies with the risk manager, not the risk assessors. 26. The conclusion of the risk assessment including a risk estimate, if available, should be presented in a readily understandable and useful form to risk managers and made available to other risk assessors and interested parties so that they can review the assessment.
RISK MANAGEMENT.
27. While recognizing the dual purposes of the Codex Alimentarius are protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade, Codex decisions and recommendations on risk management should have as their primary objective the protection of the health of consumers. Unjustified differences in the level of consumer health protection to address similar risks in different situations should be avoided. 45.
28. Risk management should follow a structured approach including preliminary risk management activities9, evaluation of risk management options, monitoring and review of the decision taken. The decisions should be based on risk assessment, and taking into account, where appropriate, other legitimate factors relevant for the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair practices in food trade, in accordance with the Criteria for the Consideration of the Other Factors Referred to in the Second Statement of Principles10. 29. The Codex Alimentarius Commission and its subsidiary bodies, acting as risk managers in the context of these Working Principles, should ensure that the conclusion of the risk assessment is presented before making final proposals or decisions on the available risk management options, in particular in the setting of standards or maximum levels, bearing in mind the guidance given in paragraph 10. 30. In achieving agreed outcomes, risk management should take into account relevant production, storage and handling practices used throughout the food chain including traditional practices, methods of analysis, sampling and inspection, feasibility of enforcement and compliance, and the prevalence of specific adverse health effects. 31. The risk management process should be transparent, consistent and fully documented. Codex decisions and recommendations on risk management should be documented, and where appropriate clearly identified in individual Codex standards and related texts so as to facilitate a wider understanding of the risk management process by all interested parties. 32. The outcome of the preliminary risk management activities and the risk assessment should be combined with the evaluation of available risk management options in order to reach a decision on management of the risk. 33. Risk management options should be assessed in terms of the scope and purpose of risk analysis and the level of consumer health protection they achieve. The option of not taking any action should also be considered. 34. In order to avoid unjustified trade barriers, risk management should ensure transparency and consistency in the decision-making process in all cases.
For the purpose of these Principles, preliminary risk management activities are taken to include: identification of a food safety problem; establishment of a risk profile; ranking of the hazard for risk assessment and risk management priority; establishment of risk assessment policy for the conduct of the risk assessment; commissioning of the risk assessment; and consideration of the result of the risk assessment. See General Decisions of th e Commission - Appendix, page 181.
Examination of the full range of risk management options should, as far as possible, take into account an assessment of their potential advantages and disadvantages. When making a choice among different risk management options, which are equally effective in protecting the health of the consumer, the Commission and its subsidiary bodies should seek and take into consideration the potential impact of such measures on trade among its Member countries and select measures that are no more trade-restrictive than necessary. 35. Risk management should take into account the economic consequences and the feasibility of risk management options. Risk management should also recognize the need for alternative options in the establishment of standards, guidelines and other recommendations, consistent with the protection of consumers' health. In taking these elements into consideration, the Commission and its subsidiary bodies should give particular attention to the circumstances of developing countries. 36. Risk management should be a continuing process that takes into account all newly generated data in the evaluation and review of risk management decisions. Food standards and related texts should be reviewed regularly and updated as necessary to reflect new scientific knowledge and other information relevant to risk analysis.
RISK COMMUNICATION.
37. Risk communication should : i) ii) promote awareness and understanding of the specific issues under consideration during the risk analysis ; promote consistency and transparency in formulating risk management options/recommendations;.
iii) provide a sound basis for understanding the risk management decisions proposed; iv) v) vi) improve the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the risk analysis ; strengthen the working relationships among participants; foster public understanding of the process, so as to enhance trust and confidence in the safety of the food supply;.
vii) promote the appropriate involvement of all interested parties; and viii) exchange information in relation to the concerns of interested parties about the risks associated with food. 38. Risk analysis should include clear, interactive and documented communication, amongst risk assessors (Joint FAO/WHO expert bodies and consultations) 47.
and risk managers (Codex Alimentarius Commission and its subsidiary bodies), and reciprocal communication with member countries and all interested parties in all aspects of the process. 39. Risk communication should be more than the dissemination of information. Its major function should be to ensure that all information and opinion required for effective risk management is incorporated into the decision making process. 40. Risk communication involving interested parties should include a transparent explanation of the risk assessment policy and of the assessment of risk, including the uncertainty. The need for specific standards or related texts and the procedures followed to determine them, including how the uncertainty was dealt with, should also be clearly explained. It should indicate any constraints, uncertainties, assumptions and their impact on the risk analysis, and minority opinions that had been expressed in the course of the risk assessment (see para. 25). 41. The guidance on risk communication in this document is addressed to all those involved in carrying out risk analysis within the framework of Codex Alimentarius. However, it is also of importance for this work to be made as transparent and accessible as possible to those not directly engaged in the process and other interested parties while respecting legitimate concerns to preserve confidentiality (See para. 6).
Definitions.
DEFINITIONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS.
For the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius: Food means any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, and includes drink, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of "food" but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs. Food hygiene comprises conditions and measures necessary for the production, processing, storage and distribution of food designed to ensure a safe, sound, wholesome product fit for human consumption. Food additive means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result, (directly or indirectly) in it or its by-products becoming a component of or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include "contaminants" or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities. Contaminant means any substance not intentionally added to food, which is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations carried out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food or as a result of environmental contamination. The term does not include insect fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter. Pesticide means any substance intended for preventing, destroying, attracting, repelling, or controlling any pest including unwanted species of plants or animals during the production, storage, transport, distribution and processing of food, agricultural commodities, or animal feeds or which may be administered to animals for the control of ectoparasites. The term includes substances intended for use as a plant growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant, fruit thinning agent, or sprouting inhibitor and substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport. The term normally excludes fertilizers, plant and animal nutrients, food additives, and animal drugs.
Pesticide Residue means any specified substance in food, agricultural commodities, or animal feed resulting from the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivatives of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites, reaction products, and impurities considered to be of toxicological significance. Good Agricultural Practice in the Use of Pesticides (GAP) includes the nationally authorized safe uses of pesticides under actual conditions necessary for effective and reliable pest control. It encompasses a range of levels of pesticide applications up to the highest authorised use, applied in a manner which leaves a residue which is the smallest amount practicable. Authorized safe uses are determined at the national level and include nationally registered or recommended uses, which take into account public and occupational health and environmental safety considerations. Actual conditions include any stage in the production, storage, transport, distribution and processing of food commodities and animal feed. Codex maximum limit for pesticide residues (MRLP) is the maximum concentration of a pesticide residue (expressed as mg/kg), recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to be legally permitted in or on food commodities and animal feeds. MRLs are based on GAP data and foods derived from commodities that comply with the respective MRLs are intended to be toxicologically acceptable. Codex MRLs, which are primarily intended to apply in international trade, are derived from estimations made by the JMPR following: (a) toxicological assessment of the pesticide and its residue; and (b) review of residue data from supervised trials and supervised uses including those reflecting national good agricultural practices. Data from supervised trials conducted at the highest nationally recommended, authorized or registered uses are included in the review. In order to accommodate variations in national pest control requirements, Codex MRLs take into account the higher levels shown to arise in such supervised trials, which are considered to represent effective pest control practices. Consideration of the various dietary residue intake estimates and determinations both at the national and international level in comparison with the ADI, should indicate that foods complying with Codex MRLs are safe for human consumption. Veterinary drug means any substance applied or administered to any food producing animal, such as meat or milk producing animals, poultry, fish or bees,.
whether used for therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic purposes or for modification of physiological functions or behaviour. Residues of veterinary drugs include the parent compounds and/or their metabolites in any edible portion of the animal product, and include residues of associated impurities of the veterinary drug concerned. Codex maximum limit for residues of veterinary drugs (MRLVD) is the maximum concentration of residue resulting from the use of a veterinary drug (expressed in mg/kg or g/kg on a fresh weight basis) that is recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to be legally permitted or recognized as acceptable in or on a food. It is based on the type and amount of residue considered to be without any toxicological hazard for human health as expressed by the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI), or on the basis of a temporary ADI that utilizes an additional safety factor. It also takes into account other relevant public health risks as well as food technological aspects. When establishing an MRL, consideration is also given to residues that occur in food of plant origin and/or the environment. Furthermore, the MRL may be reduced to be consistent with good practices in the use of veterinary drugs and to the extent that practical analytical methods are available. Good Practice in the Use of Veterinary Drugs (GPVD) is the official recommended or authorized usage including withdrawal periods, approved by national authorities, of veterinary drugs under practical conditions. Processing aid means any substance or material, not including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non-intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product.
DEFINITIONS OF RISK ANALYSIS TERMS RELATED TO FOOD SAFETY.
Hazard: A biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect. Hazard Identification: The identification of biological, chemical, and physical agents capable of causing adverse health effects and which may be present in a particular food or group of foods. Hazard Characterization: The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the nature of the adverse health effects associated with biological, chemical and physical agents which may be present in food. For chemical agents, a dose51.
response assessment should be performed. For biological or physical agents, a dose-response assessment should be performed if the data are obtainable. Dose-Response Assessment: The determination of the relationship between the magnitude of exposure (dose) to a chemical, biological or physical agent and the severity and/or frequency of associated adverse health effects (response). Exposure Assessment: The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the likely intake of biological, chemical, and physical agents via food as well as exposures from other sources if relevant. Risk: A function of the probability of an adverse health effect and the severity of that effect, consequential to a hazard(s) in food. Risk Analysis: A process consisting of three components : risk assessment, risk management and risk communication. Risk Assessment: A scientifically based process consisting of the following steps: (i) hazard identification, (ii) hazard characterization, (iii) exposure assessment, and (iv) risk characterization. Risk Assessment Policy: Documented guidelines on the choice of options and associated judgements for their application at appropriate decision points in the risk assessment such that the scientific integrity of the process is maintained. Risk Characterization: The qualitative and/or quantitative estimation, including attendant uncertainties, of the probability of occurrence and severity of known or potential adverse health effects in a given population based on hazard identification, hazard characterization and exposure assessment. Risk Communication: The interactive exchange of information and opinions throughout the risk analysis process concerning risks, risk-related factors and risk perceptions, among risk assessors, risk managers, consumers, industry, the academic community and other interested parties, including the explanation of risk assessment findings and the basis of risk management decisions. Risk Estimate: The quantitative estimation of risk resulting from risk characterization. Risk Management: The process, distinct from risk assessment, of weighing policy alternatives, in consultation with all interested parties, considering risk assessment and other factors relevant for the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair trade practices, and, if needed, selecting appropriate prevention and control options. Risk Profile: The description of the food safety problem and its context.
SECTION II Guidelines for Codex Committees and Task Forces Principles for the Participation of International Non-governmental Organizations in the Work of Codex Criteria for Work Priorities and for Establishing Subsidiary Bodies Guidelines for the Inclusion of Specific Provisions in Codex Standards Reference System for Documents Format of Codex Standards Relations between Codex Committees Core Functions of Codex Contact Points Contents of this Section This Section of the Procedural Manual sets out the working procedures of the subsidiary bodies of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. It is primarily addressed to the Chairpersons and the Host Government Secretariats of individual Codex Committees and ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces. The Guidelines for Codex Committees and Task Forces describe the organization and conduct of meetings and the preparation and distribution of working papers and reports and principles for admitting NGOs to Observer status. The Codex Reference System for documents is explained. The Format of Codex standards and an explanatory note on how Committees and Task Forces should draft Codex standards are described here. A section describes the criteria for the establishment of work priorities and for establishing new subsidiary bodies. To ensure that the appropriate sections of Codex Commodity Standards have been reviewed for food safety, nutrition, consumer protection and food analysis, a section on the Relations between Commodity Committees and General Committees is included for guidance to Codex Committees and Task Forces. A section on Core Functions of Codex Contact Points lists the main tasks of Codex Contact Points at the national level and describes their interaction with the Codex Commission, Committees and Task Forces.
Guidelines for Committees.
GUIDELINES FOR CODEX COMMITTEES AND AD HOC INTERGOVERNMENTAL TASK FORCES.
By virtue of Article 7 of the Statutes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and Rule IX.1(b) of its Rules of Procedure, the Commission has established a number of Codex Committees and ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces to prepare standards in accordance with the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards and Coordinating Committees to exercise general coordination of its work in specific regions or groups of countries. The Rules of Procedure of the Commission shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to Codex Committees, Coordinating Committees and ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces. The Guidelines applying to Codex Committees as descibed in this Secion apply also to Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces.
COMPOSITION OF CODEX COMMITTEES.
M EMBERSHIP.
Membership of Codex Committees is open to Members of the Commission who have notified the Director-General of FAO or WHO of their desire to be considered as members thereof or to selected members designated by the Commission. Membership of Regional Coordinating Committees is open only to Members of the Commission belonging to the region or group of countries concerned. OBSERVERS.
Any other Member of the Commission or any Member or Associate Member of FAO or WHO which has not become a Member of the Commission may participate as an observer at any Codex Committee if it has notified the Director-General of FAO or WHO of its wish to do so. Such countries may participate fully in the discussions of the Committee and shall be provided with the same opportunities as other Members to express their point of view (including the submission of memoranda), but without the right to vote or to move motions either of substance or of procedure. International organizations which have formal relations with either FAO or WHO should also be invited to attend in an observer capacity sessions of those Codex Committees which are of interest to them.
ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission will designate a member country of the Commission, which has indicated its willingness to accept financial and all other responsibility, as having responsibility for appointing a chairperson of the Committee. The member country concerned is responsible for appointing the chairperson of the Committee from among its own nationals. Should this person for any reason be unable to take the chair, the member country concerned shall designate another person to perform the functions of the chairperson for as long as the chairperson is unable to do so. A Committee may appoint at any session one or more rapporteurs from among the delegates present. S ECRETARIAT.
A member country to which a Codex Committee has been assigned is responsible for providing all conference services including the secretariat. The secretariat should have adequate administrative support staff able to work easily in the languages used at the session and should have at its disposal adequate word processing and document reproducing equipment. Interpretation, preferably simultaneous, should be provided from and into all languages used at the session, and if the report of the session is to be adopted in more than one of the working languages of the Committee, then the services of a translator should be available. The Committee secretariat and the Joint FAO/WHO (Codex) Secretariat are charged with the preparation of the draft report in consultation with the rapporteurs, if any. DUTIES AND TERMS OF REFERENCE.
The duties of a Codex Committee shall include: (a) the drawing up of a list of priorities as appropriate, among the subjects and products within its terms of reference, (b) consideration of the types of safety and quality elements (or recommendations) to be covered, whether in standards for general application or in reference to specific food products, (c) consideration of the types of product to be covered by standards, e.g., whether materials for further processing into food should be covered, (d) preparation of draft Codex standards within its terms of reference, (e) reporting to each session of the Commission on the progress of its work and, where necessary, on any difficulties caused by its terms of reference, together with suggestions for their amendment.
(f) the review and, as necessary, revision of existing standards and related texts on a scheduled, periodic basis to ensure that the standards and related texts within its terms of reference are consistent with current scientific knowledge and other relevant information.
INVITATIONS AND PROVISIONAL AGENDA.
Sessions of Codex Committees and Coordinating Committees will be convened by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO in consultation with the chairperson of the respective Codex Committee. The letter of invitation and provisional agenda shall be prepared by the Chief, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Rome, in consultation with the chairperson of the committee for issue by the Directors-General to all Members and Associate Members of FAO and WHO or, in the case of Coordinating Committees, to the countries of the region or group of countries concerned, Codex Contact Points and interested international organizations in accordance with the official mailing lists of FAO and WHO. Chairpersons should, before finalizing the drafts, inform and consult with the national Codex Contact Point where one has been established, and, if necessary, obtain clearance from the national authorities concerned (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health, or as the case may be). The invitation and Provisional Agenda will be translated and distributed by FAO/WHO in the working languages of the Commission at least four months before the date of the meeting.
Invitations should include the following: (a) title of the Codex Committee, (b) time and date of opening and date of closing of the session, (c) place of the session, (d) languages to be used and arrangements for interpretation, i.e., whether simultaneous or not, (e) if appropriate, information on hotel accommodation, (f) request for the names of the chief delegate and other members of the delegation, and for information on whether the chief delegate of a government will be attending as a representative or in the capacity of an observer.
Replies to invitations will normally be requested to be sent to reach the chairperson as early as possible and in any case not less than 30 days before the.
Codex Alimentarius Commission 7.
session. A copy should be sent also to the Chief, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Rome. It is of the utmost importance that by the date requested a reply to invitations should be sent by all those governments and international organizations which intend to participate. The reply should specify the number of copies and the language of the documents required. 10. The Provisional Agenda should state the time, date and place of the meeting and should include the following items: (a) adoption of the agenda, (b) if considered necessary, election of rapporteurs, (c) items relating to subject matter to be discussed, including, where appropriate, the step in the Commission's Procedure for the Elaboration of Standards at which the item is being dealt with at the session. There should also be reference to the Committee papers relevant to the item, (d) any other business, (e) consideration of date and place of next session, (f) adoption of draft report. 11. The work of the Committee and the length of the meeting should be so arranged as to leave sufficient time at the end of the session for a report of the Committee's transactions to be agreed. ORGANIZATION OF WORK 12 A Codex or Coordinating Committee may assign specific tasks to countries, groups of countries or to international organizations represented at meetings of the Committee and may ask member countries and international organizations for views on specific points. Ad hoc working groups established to accomplish specific tasks shall be disbanded once the tasks have been accomplished as determined by the Committee. Reports of ad hoc working groups shall be distributed to all members of the Committee and observers in time to allow full consideration of the working groups' recommendations. A Codex or Coordinating Committee may not set up standing sub-committees, whether open to all Members of the Commission or not, without the specific approval of the Commission. PREPARATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF PAPERS 13. Papers for a session should be sent by the chairperson of the Codex Committee concerned at least two months before the opening of the session to the following: (i) all Codex Contact Points, (ii) chief delegates of member.
countries, of observer countries and of international organizations, and (iii) other participants on the basis of replies received. Twenty copies of all papers in each of the languages used in the Committee concerned should be sent to the Chief, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Rome. 14. Papers for a session prepared by participants must be drafted in one of the working languages of the Commission, which should, if possible, be one of the languages used in the Codex Committee concerned. These papers should be sent to the chairperson of the Committee, with a copy to the Chief, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Rome, in good time (see paragraph 13) to be included in the distribution of papers for the session. 15. Documents circulated at a session of a Codex Committee other than draft documents prepared at the session and ultimately issued in a final form, should subsequently receive the same distribution as other papers prepared for the Committee. 16. Codex Contact Points will be responsible for ensuring that papers are circulated to those concerned within their own country and for ensuring that all necessary action is taken by the date specified. 17. Consecutive reference numbers in suitable series should be assigned to all documents of Codex Committees. The reference number should appear at the top right-hand corner of the first page together with a statement of the language in which the document was prepared and the date of its preparation. A clear statement should be made of the provenance (origin or author country) of the paper immediately under the title. The text should be divided into numbered paragraphs. At the end of these guidelines is a series of references for Codex documents adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission for its own sessions and those of its subsidiary bodies. 18. Members of the Codex Committees should advise the Committee chairperson through their Codex Contact Point of the number of copies should advise the Committee chairperson through their Codex Contact Point of the number of copies of documents normally required. 19. Working papers of Codex Committees may be circulated freely to all those assisting a delegation in preparing for the business of the Committee; they should not, however, be published. There is, however, no objection to the publication of reports of the meetings of committees or of completed draft standards. CONDUCT OF MEETINGS 20. Meetings of Codex and Coordinating Committees shall be held in public unless the Committee decides otherwise. Member countries responsible for.
Codex and Coordinating Committees shall decide who should open meetings on their behalf. The chairperson should invite observations from members of the Committee concerning the Provisional Agenda and in the light of such observations formally request the Committee to adopt the Provisional Agenda or the amended agenda. Meetings should be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. Attention is particularly drawn to Rule VII.7 which reads: "The provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of FAO shall apply mutatis mutandis to all matters which are not specifically dealt with under Rule VI of the present Rules." Rule XII of the General Rules of FAO, a copy of which will be supplied to all chairpersons of Codex and Coordinating Committees, gives full instructions on the procedures to be followed in dealing with voting, points of order, adjournment and suspension of meetings, adjournment and closure of discussions on a particular item, reconsideration of a subject already decided and the order in which amendments should be dealt with. 21. Chairpersons of Codex Committees should ensure that all questions are fully discussed, in particular statements concerning possible economic implications of standards under consideration at Steps 4 and.
Chairpersons should also ensure that the written comments of members not present at the session are considered by the Committee; that all issues are put clearly to the Committee. This can usually best be done by stating what appears to be the generally acceptable view and asking delegates whether they have any objection to its being adopted. The chairpersons should always try to arrive at a consensus and should not ask the Committee to proceed to voting if agreement on the Committee's decision can be secured by consensus. 22. Delegations and delegations from observer countries who wish their opposition to a decision of the Committee to be recorded may do so, whether the decision has been taken by a vote or not, by asking for a statement of their position to be contained in the report of the Committee. This statement should not merely use a phrase such as: "The delegation of X reserved its position" but should make clear the extent of the delegation's opposition to a particular decision of the Committee and state whether they were simply opposed to the decision or wished for a further opportunity to consider the question. 23. Only the chief delegates of member countries, or of observer countries or of international organizations have the right to speak unless they authorize other members of their delegations to do so.
24. In preparing reports, the following points shall be borne in mind:.
(a) decisions should be clearly stated; action taken in regard to economic impact statements should be fully recorded; all decisions on draft standards should be accompanied by an indication of the step in the Procedure that the standards have reached; (b) if action has to be taken before the next meeting of the committee, the nature of the action, who is to take it and when the action must be completed should be clearly stated; (c) where matters require attention by other Codex committees, this should be clearly stated; (d) if the report is of any length, summaries of points agreed and the action to be taken should be included at the end of the report, and in any case, a section should be included at the end of the report showing clearly in summary form: - standards considered at the session and the steps they have reached; - standards at any step of the Procedure, the consideration of which has been postponed or which are held in abeyance and the steps which they have reached; - new standards proposed for consideration, the probable time of their consideration at Step 2 and the responsibility for drawing up the first draft. 25. The following appendices should be attached to the report: (a) list of participants with full postal addresses, (b) draft standards with an indication of the step in the Procedure which has been reached. 26. The Joint FAO/WHO Secretariat should ensure that, as soon as posible and in any event not later than one month after the end of the session, copies of the final report, as adopted, are sent to all participants, and all Codex Contact Points.
DRAWING UP OF CODEX STANDARDS.
27. A Codex committee, in drawing up standards and related texts, should bear in mind the following: (a) the guidance given in the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius; (b) that all standards and related texts should have a preface containing the following information:.
- the description of the standard or related text, - a brief description of the scope and purpose(s) of the standard or related text, - references including the step which the standard or related text has reached in the Commission's Procedures for the Elaboration of Standards, together with the date on which the draft was approved, - matters in the draft standard or related text requiring endorsement or action by other Codex Committees. (c) that for standards or any related text for a product which includes a number of sub-categories, the Committee should give preference to the development of a general standard or related text with specific provisions as necessary for sub-categories with different requirements.
Principles of NGO participation.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE PARTICIPATION OF INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE WORK OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
The purpose of collaboration with International Non-Governmental Organizations is to secure for the Codex Alimentarius Commission, expert information, advice and assistance from international non-governmental organizations and to enable organizations which represent important sections of public opinion and are authorities in their fields of professional and technical competence to express the views of their members and to play an appropriate role in ensuring the harmonizing of intersectoral interests among the various sectoral bodies concerned in a country, regional or global setting. Arrangements made with such organizations shall be designed to advance the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission by securing maximum cooperation from International Non-Governmental Organizations in the execution of its programme.
TYPES OF RELATIONSHIP.
Only one category of relationship shall be recognized, namely "Observer Status"; all other contacts, including working relations, shall be considered to be of an informal character.
ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR "OBSERVER STATUS".
The following shall be eligible for Observer Status: International Non-Governmental Organizations in consultative status, specialized consultative status or liaison status with FAO; International Non-Governmental Organizations having official relations with WHO; and International Non-Governmental Organizations that: (a) are international in structure and scope of activity, and representative of the specialized field of interest in which they operate; (b) are concerned with matters covering a part or all of the Commission's field of activity;.
(c) have aims and purposes in conformity with the Statutes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission; and (d) have a permanent directing body, authorized representatives and systematic procedures and machinery for communicating with its membership in various countries. Its members shall exercise voting rights in relation to its policies or action or shall have other appropriate mechanisms to express their views.
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING "OBSERVER STATUS".
4.1 INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS HAVING STATUS OR OFFICIAL RELATIONS WITH FAO AND WHO.
"Observer status" shall be accorded to those International Non-Governmental Organizations in consultative status, specialized consultative status or liaison status with FAO or International Non-Governmental Organizations having official relations with WHO that inform the Secretary of the Codex Alimentarius Commission of their desire to participate in the work of the Commission and/or any or all of the Commission's subsidiary bodies11 on a regular basis. They may also request invitations to participate at specific sessions of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies on an ad hoc basis. 4.2 NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS NOT HAVING STATUS OR OFFICIAL RELATIONS WITH FAO AND WHO.
Before any form of formal relationship is established with a Non-Governmental Organization, such Organization shall supply the Secretary of the Commission with the information outlined in the Annex to these Procedures. The Secretary shall transmit this information to the Directors-General of FAO and WHO. Upon confirmation that the Directors-General are satisfied that the applicant Organization is in a position to make a significant contribution in advancing the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, Observer Status shall be granted to the applicant Organization. Observer Status at specific meetings will not normally be granted to individual organizations that are members of a larger organization authorized and that intends to represent them at these meetings.
The term "subsidiary bodies" means any body established under Rule IX of the Commission's Rules of Procedure.
PRIVILEGES AND OBLIGATIONS.
International Non-governmental Organizations in Observer status shall have the following privileges and obligations: 5.1 PRIVILEGES OF INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN "OBSERVER STATUS" An Organization in Observer Status: (a) shall be entitled to send an observer (without the right to vote) to sessions of the Commission, who may be accompanied by advisers; to receive from the Secretary of the Commission, in advance of the session, all working documents and discussion papers; to circulate to the Commission its views in writing, without abridgement; and to participate in discussions when invited by the Chairperson12; (b) shall be entitled to send an observer (without the right to vote) to sessions of specified Subsidiary Bodies, who may be accompanied by advisers; to receive from the Secretaries of the Subsidiary Bodies, in advance of the session, all working documents and discussion papers; to circulate to these Bodies its views in writing, without abridgement; and to participate in discussions when invited by the Chairperson12; (c) may be invited by the Directors-General to participate in meetings or seminars on subjects organized under the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme which fall within its fields of interest, and if it does not so participate it may submit its views in writing to any such meeting or seminar; (d) will receive documentation and information about meetings planned on subjects agreed upon with the Secretariat; (e) may submit, under the authority of its governing body, written statements on matters before the Commission, in one of the languages of Commission, to the Secretary, who may communicate them to the Commission or the Executive Committee as appropriate. 5.2 OBLIGATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN "OBSERVER STATUS" An Organization in Observer Status shall undertake:.
An invitation to a Codex meeting and representation thereat by an observer shall not imply the granting to an international non-governmental organization of a status different from that which it already enjoys. 64.
(a) to cooperate fully with the Codex Alimentarius Commission for the furtherance of the objectives of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme; (b) in cooperation with the Secretariat, to determine the ways and means of co-ordinating activities within the scope of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, with a view to avoiding duplication and overlapping; (c) to contribute, as far as possible, and at the request of the DirectorsGeneral, to the promotion of a better knowledge and understanding of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme through appropriate discussions or other forms of publicity; (d) to send to the Secretary of the Commission on an exchange basis, its reports and publications concerned with matters covering all or part of the Commission's field of activity; (e) to keep the Secretary of the Commission informed of changes in its structure and membership, as well as of important changes in its secretariat.
REVIEW OF "OBSERVER STATUS".
The Directors-General may terminate arrangements for Observer Status which are no longer considered necessary or appropriate in the light of changing programmes or other circumstances, and will report such action to the Commission. However, the international non-governmental organization concerned may appeal the termination of Observer Status. An international non-governmental organization in Observer Status which has not shown any interest and has not attended any meetings during a period of four years may be deemed not to have sufficient interest to warrant the continuance of such relationship. The Secretary shall report to the Codex Alimentarius Commission on the relations between the Codex Alimentarius Commission and international nongovernmental organizations established in accordance with the present Procedures and shall provide a list of organizations granted Observer Status, with an indication of the membership that they represent. The Commission shall periodically review these principles and procedures and shall consider, as necessary, any amendments which may seem desirable.
(a) Official name of the organization in different languages (with initials) (b) Full postal address, Telephone, Telex address, Facsimile and Email as appropriate (c) Aims and subject fields (mandate) of organization, and methods of operation. (Enclose charter, constitution, by-laws, rules of procedures, etc.).
(d) Member organizations (name and address of each national affiliate, method of affiliation, giving number of members where possible, and names of principal officers. If the organization has individual members, please indicate approximate number in each country) (e) Structure (assembly or conference; council or other form of governing body; type of general secretariat; commissions on special topics, if any; etc.) Indication of source of funding (e.g., membership contributions, direct funding, external contributions, or grants).
(g) Meetings (indicate frequency and average attendance; send report of previous meeting, including any resolutions passed) that are concerned with matters covering all or part of the Commission's field of activity (h) Relations with other international organizations: (i) (j) (l) UN and organs (indicate consultative status or other relationship, if any) Other international organizations Past activities on behalf of, or in relation to, the Codex Alimentarius Commission and the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme (indicate any relationship by national affiliates with the Regional Coordinating Committees and/or the National Codex Contact Points or Committees).
(k) Expected contribution to the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme.
(m) Area of activity in which participation as an observer is requested (Commission and/or Subsidiary Bodies). If more than one organization with similar interests is requesting observer status in any field of activity, such organizations will be encouraged to form themselves into a federation or association for the purpose of participation. If the formation of such a single organization is not feasible, the application should explain why this is so.
(n) Language (English, French or Spanish)in which documentation should be sent to the international non-governmental organizations (o) Name, Function and address of the person providing the information (p) Signature and date.
Work priorities.
CRITERIA FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WORK PRIORITIES.
When a Codex Committee proposes to elaborate a standard, code of practice or related text within its terms of reference, it should first consider the priorities established by the Commission in the Medium-Term Plan of Work, any specific relevant strategic project currently being undertaken by the Commission and the prospect of completing the work within a reasonable period of time. It should also assess the proposal against the criteria set out below. If the proposal falls in an area outside the Committee's terms of reference the proposal should be reported to the Commission in writing together with proposals for such amendments to the Committee's terms of reference as may be required. CRITERIA Criteria applicable to general subjects (a) Consumer protection from the point of view of health and fraudulent practices. (b) Diversification of national legislations and apparent resultant or potential impediments to international trade. (c) Scope of work and establishment of priorities between the various sections of the work. (d) Work already undertaken by other international organizations in this field. Criteria applicable to commodities (a) Consumer protection from the point of view of health and fraudulent practices. (b) Volume of production and consumption in individual countries and volume and pattern of trade between countries. (c) Diversification of national legislations and apparent resultant or potential impediments to international trade. (d) International or regional market potential. (e) Amenability of the commodity to standardization. (f) Coverage of the main consumer protection and trade issues by existing or proposed general standards. 68.
(g) Number of commodities which would need separate standards indicating whether raw, semi processed or processed. (h) Work already undertaken by other international organizations in this field.
Criteria for subsidiary bodies.
CRITERIA FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
When there is a proposal for the elaboration of a standard, code of practice or related text in an area not covered by the terms of reference of any existing subsidiary body13, or the revision of standards, codes of practice or other texts elaborated by subsidiary bodies adjourned sine die, such a proposal should be accompanied by a written statement to the Commission explaining its justification in light of the Commission's Medium-Term Objectives and containing, as far as practicable, the information contained in the Criteria for the Establishment of Work Priorities. Should the Commission decide to establish a Subsidiary Body for the purpose of elaborating an appropriate draft standard or related text or for the purpose of revising an existing standard(s) or related text(s), first consideration should be given to the establishment of an ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force under Rule X.1(b)(i) of the Commission's Rules of Procedure under the following conditions:.
TERMS OF REFERENCE: the terms of reference of the proposed ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force shall be limited to the immediate task at hand and normally shall not be subsequently modified; the terms of reference shall clearly state the objective(s) to be achieved by the establishment of the ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force; the terms of reference shall clearly state either (i) the number of sessions to be convened, or (ii) the date (year) by which the work is expected to be completed, which in any case shall not exceed five years.
REPORTING: The ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force shall report to the Codex Alimentarius Commission and to the Executive Committee on the progress of its work. The reports of the ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force shall be transmitted to all Members of the Commission and interested international organization.
The Commission may wish to consider extending the Terms of Reference of an appropriate existing body to accommodate the proposal. 70.
OPERATING EXPENSES: No provision shall be made concerning the operating expenditures of the ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force in the estimate of expenditures of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, except insofar as costs involved in preparatory work are recognized as operating expenses of the Commission in accordance with Article 10 of its Statutes.
HOST GOVERNMENT ARRANGEMENTS: The Commission, at the time of the establishment of the ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force shall ascertain that there will be appropriate host government arrangements adequate to ensure the functioning of the Task Force for the duration of its assignment.14.
WORKING PROCEDURES: Ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces shall be open to all Members of the Commission and the Rules of Procedure of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and the Uniform Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards and Related Texts shall apply mutatis mutandis to ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces.
DISSOLUTION: The ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force shall be dissolved after the specified work has been completed or when the number of sessions or the time limit allocated for the work has expired.
This may involve Host Government arrangements with one or more Members of the Commission.
Specific provisions in Codex texts.
GUIDELINES FOR THE INCLUSION OF SPECIFIC PROVISIONS IN CODEX STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS.
GUIDELINES ON THE ELABORATION AND/OR REVISION OF CODES OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR SPECIFIC COMMODITIES.
The establishment of additional food hygiene requirements for specific food items or food groups should be limited to the extent necessary to meet the defined objectives of individual codes. Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice should serve the primary purpose of providing advice to governments on the application of food hygiene provisions within the framework of national and international requirements. The Revised Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (including the Guidelines for the Application of the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) System) and the Revised Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods are the base documents in the field of food hygiene. All Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice applicable to specific food items or food groups shall refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene and shall only contain material additional to the General Principles which is necessary to take into account the particular requirements of the specific food item or food group. Provisions in Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice should be drafted in a sufficiently clear and transparent manner such that extended explanatory material is not required for their interpretation. The above considerations should also apply to Codex Codes of Practice which contain provisions relating to food hygiene.
PRINCIPLES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CODEX METHODS OF ANALYSIS.
PURPOSE OF CODEX METHODS OF ANALYSIS The methods are primarily intended as international methods for the verification of provisions in Codex standards. They should be used for reference, in calibration of methods in use or introduced for routine examination and control purposes.
METHODS OF ANALYSIS Definition of types of methods of analysis (a) Defining Methods (Type I) Definition: A method which determines a value that can only be arrived at in terms of the method per se and serves by definition as the only method for establishing the accepted value of the item measured. Examples: Howard Mould Count, Reichert-Meissl value, loss on drying, salt in brine by density. (b) Reference Methods (Type II) Definition: A Type II method is the one designated Reference Method where Type I methods do not apply. It should be selected from Type III methods (as defined below). It should be recommended for use in cases of dispute and for calibration purposes. Example: Potentiometric method for halides. (c) Alternative Approved Methods (Type III) Definition: A Type III Method is one which meets the criteria required by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling for methods that may be used for control, inspection or regulatory purposes. Example: Volhard Method or Mohr Method for chlorides (d) Tentative Method (Type IV) Definition: A Type IV Method is a method which has been used traditionally or else has been recently introduced but for which the criteria required for acceptance by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling have not yet been determined. Examples: chlorine by X-ray fluorescence, estimation of synthetic colours in foods. General Criteria for the Selection of Methods of Analysis (a) Official methods of analysis elaborated by international organizations occupying themselves with a food or group of foods should be preferred. (b) Preference should be given to methods of analysis the reliability of which have been established in respect of the following criteria, selected as appropriate: (i) specificity 73.
accuracy precision; repeatability intra-laboratory (within laboratory), reproducibility inter-laboratory (within laboratory and between laboratories) limit of detection sensitivity practicability and applicability under normal laboratory conditions other criteria which may be selected as required.
(iv) (v) (vi) (vii).
(c) The method selected should be chosen on the basis of practicability and preference should be given to methods which have applicability for routine use. (d) All proposed methods of analysis must have direct pertinence to the Codex Standard to which they are directed. (e) Methods of analysis which are applicable uniformly to various groups of commodities should be given preference over methods which apply only to individual commodities. General Criteria for the Selection of Methods of Analysis using the Criteria Approach In the case of Codex Type II and Type III methods, method criteria may be identified and values quantified for incorporation into the appropriate Codex commodity standard. Method criteria which are developed will include the criteria in section Methods of Analysis, paragraph (c) above together with other appropriate criteria, e.g., recovery factors." WORKING INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CRITERIA APPROACH IN CODEX Any Codex Commodity Committee may continue to propose an appropriate method of analysis for determining the chemical entity, or develop a set of criteria to which a method used for the determination must comply. In some cases a Codex Commodity Committee may find it easier to recommend a specific method and request the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CCMAS) to "convert" that method into appropriate criteria. The Criteria will then be considered by the CCMAS for endorsement and will, after the endorsement, form part of the commodity standard replacing the recommended method of analysis. If a Codex Commodity Committee wishes to develop the criteria by itself rather than allowing the CCMAS to do so, it should.
follow instructions given for the development of specific criteria as outlined below. These criteria must be approved for the determination in question. However, the primary responsibility for supplying methods of analysis and criteria resides with the Commodity Committee. If the Commodity Committee fails to provide a method of analysis or criteria despite numerous requests, then the CCMAS may supply an appropriate method and "convert" that method into appropriate criteria. The minimum "approved" Codex analytical characteristics will include the following numeric criteria as well as the general criteria for methods laid down in the Analytical Terminology for Codex Use (see page 76): precision (within and between laboratories, but generated from collaborative trial data rather than measurement uncertainty considerations) recovery selectivity (interference effects etc.) applicability (matrix, concentration range and preference given to 'general' methods) detection/determination limits if appropriate for the determination being considered linearity CCMAS will generate the data corresponding to the above criteria.
CONVERSION OF SPECIFIC METHODS OF ANALYSIS TO METHOD CRITERIA BY THE CCMAS.
When a Codex Commodity Committee submits a Type II or Type III method to CCMAS for endorsement, it should also submit information on the criteria listed below to enable the CCMAS to convert it into suitable generalized analytical characteristics: accuracy applicability (matrix, concentration range and preference given to 'general' methods) detection limit determination limit.
precision; repeatability intra-laboratory (within laboratory), reproducibility inter-laboratory (within laboratory and between laboratories), but generated from collaborative trial data rather than measurement uncertainty considerations recovery selectivity sensitivity linearity These terms are defined in the Analytical Terminology for Codex Use (see page ##), as are other terms of importance. The CCMAS will assess the actual analytical performance of the method which has been determined in its validation. This will take account of the appropriate precision characteristics obtained in collaborative trials which may have been carried out on the method together with results from other development work carried out during the course of the method development. The set of criteria that are developed will form part of the report of the CCMAS and will be inserted in the appropriate Codex Commodity Standard. In addition, the CCMAS will identify numeric values for the criteria for which it would wish such methods to comply. ASSESSMENT OF THE ACCEPTABILITY OF THE PRECISION CHARACTERISTICS OF A METHOD OF ANALYSIS The calculated repeatability and reproducibility values can be compared with existing methods and a comparison made. If these are satisfactory then the method can be used as a validated method. If there is no method with which to compare the precision parameters then theoretical repeatability and reproducibility values can be calculated from the Horwitz equation. (M. Thompson, Analyst, 2000, 125, 385-386).
ANALYTICAL TERMINOLOGY FOR CODEX USE.
Result: The final value reported for a measured or computed quantity, after performing a measuring procedure including all sub-procedures and evaluations. Notes: When a result is given, it should be made clear whether it refers to: the indication [signal];.
the uncorrected result; the corrected result; and whether several values were averaged. A complete statement of the result of a measurement includes information about the uncertainty of measurement. Specificity: The property of a method to respond exclusively to the characteristic or analyte defined in the Codex standard. Notes: Specificity may be achieved by many means: It may be inherent in the molecule (e.g., infrared or mass spectrometric identification techniques), or attained by separations (e.g., chromatography), mathematically (e.g., simultaneous equations), or biochemically (e.g., enzyme reactions). Very frequently methods rely on the absence of interferences to achieve specificity (e.g., determination of chloride in the absence of bromide and iodide). In some cases specificity is not desired (e.g., total fat, fatty acids, crude protein, dietary fibre, reducing sugars). Accuracy (as a concept): The closeness of agreement between the reported result and the accepted reference value. Notes: The term accuracy, when applied to a set of test results, involves a combination of random components and a common systematic error or bias component. When the systematic error component must be arrived at by a process that includes random error, the random error component is increased by propagation of error considerations and is reduced by replication. Accuracy (as a statistic): The closeness of agreement between a reported result and the accepted reference value. Notes: Accuracy as a statistic applies to the single reported final test result; accuracy as a concept applies to single, replicate, or averaged values. Trueness: The closeness of agreement between the average value obtained from a series of test results and an accepted reference value. Notes: The measure of trueness is usually expressed in terms of bias. Trueness has been referred to as "accuracy of the mean".
Bias: The difference between the expectation of the test results and an accepted reference value. Notes: Bias is the total systematic error as contrasted to random error. There may be one or more systematic error components contributing to bias. A larger systematic difference from the accepted reference value is reflected by a larger bias value. When the systematic error component(s) must be arrived at by a process that includes random error, the random error component is increased by propagation of error considerations and reduced by replication. Precision: The closeness of agreement between independent test results obtained under stipulated conditions. Notes: Precision depends only on the distribution of random errors and does not relate to the true value or to the specified value. The measure of precision is usually expressed in terms of imprecision and computed as a standard deviation of the test results. Less precision is reflected by a larger standard deviation. "Independent test results" means results obtained in a manner not influenced by any previous result on the same or similar test object. Quantitative measures of precision depend critically on the stipulated conditions. Repeatability and reproducibility conditions are particular sets of extreme conditions. Repeatability [Reproducibility]: Precision under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions. Repeatability conditions: Conditions where independent test results are obtained with the same method on identical test items in the same laboratory by the same operator using the same equipment within short intervals of time. Reproducibility conditions: Conditions where test results are obtained with the same method on identical test items in different laboratories with different operators using different equipment. Notes: When different methods give test results that do not differ significantly, or when different methods are permitted by the design of the experiment, as in a proficiency study or a material-certification study for the establishment of a consensus value of a reference material, the term "reproducibility" may be applied to the resulting parameters. The conditions must be explicitly stated.
Repeatability [Reproducibility] standard deviation: The standard deviation of test results obtained under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions. Notes: Repeatability [Reproducibility] standard deviation is a measure of the dispersion of the distribution of test results under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions. Similarly "repeatability [reproducibility] variance" and "repeatability [reproducibility] coefficient of variation" could be defined and used as measures of the dispersion of test results under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions. Repeatability [Reproducibility] limit: The value less than or equal to which the absolute difference between two test results obtained under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions may be expected to be with a probability of 95%. Notes: The symbol used is r [R]. When examining two single test results obtained under repeatability [reproducibility] conditions, the comparison should be made with the repeatability [reproducibility] limit r [R] = 2.8 sr[sR]. When groups of measurements are used as the basis for the calculation of the repeatability [reproducibility] limits (now called the critical difference), more complicated formulae are required that are given in ISO 5725-6:1994, 4.2.1 and.
Interlaboratory Study: A study in which several laboratories measure a quantity in one or more "identical" portions of homogeneous, stable materials under documented conditions, the results of which are compiled into a single document. Notes: The larger the number of participating laboratories , the greater the confidence that can be placed in the resulting estimates of the statistical parameters. The IUPAC-1987 protocol (Pure & Appl. Chem., 66, 1903-1911(1994)) requires a minimum of eight laboratories for method-performance studies. Method-Performance Study: An interlaboratory study in which all laboratories follow the same written protocol and use the same test method to measure a quantity in sets of identical test samples. The reported results are used to estimate the performance characteristics of the method. Usually these characteristics are within-laboratory and among-laboratories precision, and when necessary and possible, other pertinent characteristics such as systematic 79.
error, recovery, internal quality control parameters, sensitivity, limit of determination, and applicability. Notes: The materials used in such a study of analytical quantities are usually representative of materials to be analyzed in actual practice with respect to matrices, amount of test component (concentration), and interfering components and effects. Usually the analyst is not aware of the actual composition of the test samples but is aware of the matrix. The number of laboratories, number of test samples, number of determinations, and other details of the study are specified in the study protocol. Part of the study protocol is the procedure which provides the written directions for performing the analysis. The main distinguishing feature of this type of study is the necessity to follow the same written protocol and test method exactly. Several methods may be compared using the same test materials. If all laboratories use the same set of directions for each method and if the statistical analysis is conducted separately for each method, the study is a set of methodperformance studies. Such a study may also be designated as a methodcomparison study. Laboratory-Performance (Proficiency ) Study: An interlaboratory study that consists of one or more measurements by a group of laboratories on one or more homogeneous, stable, test samples by the method selected or used by each laboratory. The reported results are compared with those from other laboratories or with the known or assigned reference value, usually with the objective of improving laboratory performance. Notes: Laboratory-performance studies can be used to support accreditation of laboratories or to audit performance. If a study is conducted by an organization with some type of management control over the participating laboratories-- organizational, accreditation, regulatory, or contractual--the method may be specified or the selection may be limited to a list of approved or equivalent methods. In such situations, a single test sample is insufficient to judge performance. A laboratory-performance study may be used to select a method of analysis that will be used in a method-performance study. If all laboratories, or a sufficiently large subgroup, of laboratories , use the same method, the study may also be interpreted as a method-performance study, provided that the test samples cover the range of concentration of the analyte.
Laboratories of a single organization with independent facilities, instruments, and calibration materials, are treated as different laboratories. Material-Certification Study: An interlaboratory study that assigns a reference value ("true value") to a quantity (concentration or property) in the test material, usually with a stated uncertainty. Note: A material-certification study often utilizes selected reference laboratories to analyze a candidate reference material by a method(s) judged most likely to provide the least-biased estimates of concentration (or of a characteristic property) and the smallest associated uncertainty. Applicability: The analytes, matrices, and concentrations for which a method of analysis may be used satisfactorily to determine compliance with a Codex standard. Note: In addition to a statement of the range of capability of satisfactory performance for each factor, the statement of applicability (scope) may also include warnings as to known interference by other analytes, or inapplicability to certain matrices and situations. Sensitivity: Change in the response divided by the corresponding change in the concentration of a standard (calibration) curve; i.e., the slope, si, of the analytical calibration curve. Note: This term has been used for several other analytical applications, often referring to capability of detection, to the concentration giving 1% absorption in atomic absorption spectroscopy, and to ratio of found positives to known, true positives in immunological and microbiological tests. Such applications to analytical chemistry should be discouraged. A method is said to be sensitive if a small change in concentration, c, or quantity, q, causes a large change in the measure, x; that is, when the derivative dx/dc or dx/dq is large. Although the signal may vary with the magnitude of ci or qi, the slope, si, is usually constant over a reasonable range of concentrations. si may also be a function of the c or q of other analytes present in the sample. Ruggedness: The ability of a chemical measurement process to resist changes in results when subjected to minor changes in environmental and procedural variables, laboratories, personnel, etc.
TERMS TO BE USED IN THE CRITERIA APPROACH Detection Limit: The detection limit is conventionally defined as field blank + 3 , where is the standard deviation of the field blank value signal (IUPAC definition). However, an alternative definition which overcomes most of the objections to the above approach (i.e. the high variability at the limit of measurement can never be overcome) is to base it on the rounded value of the reproducibility relative standard deviation when it goes out of control (where 3 R = 100%; R = 33%, rounded to 50% because of the high variability). Such a value is directly related to the analyte and to the measurement system and is not based on the local measurement system. Determination limit: As for detection limit except that 6 or 10 is required rather than 3 . However, an alternative definition that corresponds to that proposed for the detection limit is to use R = 25%. This value does not differ much from that assigned to the detection limit because the upper limit of the detection limit merges indistinguishably into the lower limit of the determination limit. Recovery: Proportion of the amount of analyte present or added to the test material which is extracted and presented for measurement. Selectivity: Selectivity is the extent to which a method can determine particular analyte(s) in mixtures or matrices without interferences from other components. Selectivity is the recommended term in analytical chemistry to express the extent to which a particular method can determine analyte(s) in the presence of interferences from other components. Selectivity can be graded. The use of the term specificity for the same concept is to be discouraged as this often leads to confusion. Linearity: The ability of a method of analysis, within a certain range, to provide an instrumental response or results proportional to the quality of analyte to be determined in the laboratory sample. This proportionality is expressed by an a priori defined mathematical expression. The linearity limits are the experimental limits of concentrations between which a linear calibration model can be applied with a known confidence level (generally taken to be equal to 1%).
PRINCIPLES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OR SELECTION OF CODEX SAMPLING PROCEDURES.
PURPOSE OF CODEX METHODS OF SAMPLING Codex Methods of Sampling are designed to ensure that fair and valid sampling procedures are used when food is being tested for compliance with a particular Codex commodity standard. The sampling methods are intended for use as international methods designed to avoid or remove difficulties which may be created by diverging legal, administrative and technical approaches to sampling and by diverging interpretation of results of analysis in relation to lots or consignments of foods, in the light of the relevant provision(s) of the applicable Codex standard. METHODS OF SAMPLING Types of Sampling Plans and Procedures (a) Sampling Plans for Commodity Defects: These are normally applied to visual defects (e.g. loss of colour, mis-graded for size, etc.) and extraneous matter. They will normally be attributes plans, and plans such as those included in the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Sampling Plans for Prepackaged Foods (AQL 6.5)15 may be applied. (b) Sampling Plans for Net Contents: These are sampling plans which apply to pre-packaged foods generally and are intended to serve to check compliance of lots or consignments with provisions for net contents. (c) Sampling Plans for Compositional Criteria: Such plans are normally applied to analytically determined compositional criteria (e.g., loss on drying in white sugar, etc.). They are predominantly based on variable procedures with unknown standard deviation. (d) Specific Sampling Plans for Health-related Properties: Such plans are generally applied to heterogeneous conditions, e.g., in the assessment of microbiological spoilage, microbial by-products or sporadically occurring chemical contaminants.
Codex Alimentarius: Volume 13. 83.
General Instructions for the Selection of Methods of Sampling (a) Official methods of sampling as elaborated by international organizations occupying themselves with a food or a group of foods are preferred. Such methods, when attracted to Codex standards, may be revised using Codex recommended sampling terms (to be elaborated). (b) The appropriate Codex Commodity Committee should indicate, before it elaborates any sampling plan, or before any plan is endorsed by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling, the following: (i) the basis on which the criteria in the Codex Commodity standards have been drawn up (e.g. whether on the basis that every item in a lot, or a specified high proportion, shall comply with the provision in the standard or whether the average of a set of samples extracted from a lot must comply and, if so, whether a minimum or maximum tolerance, as appropriate, is to be given); whether there is to be any differentiation in the relative importance of the criteria in the standards and, if so, what is the appropriate statistical parameter each criterion should attract, and hence, the basis for judgement when a lot is in conformity with a standard.
(c) Instructions on the procedure for the taking of samples should indicate the following: (i) (ii) (iii) (i) (ii) the measures necessary in order to ensure that the sample taken is representative of the consignment or of the lot; the size and the number of individual items forming the sample taken from the lot or consignment; the administrative measures for taking and handling the sample. the statistical criteria to be used for acceptance or rejection of the lot on the basis of the sample; the procedures to be adopted in cases of dispute.
(d) The sampling protocol may include the following information:.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS (a) The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling should maintain closest possible relations with all interested organizations working on methods of analysis and sampling.
(b) The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling should organize its work in such a manner as to keep under constant review all methods of analysis and sampling published in the Codex Alimentarius. (c) In the Codex methods of analysis, provision should be made for variations in reagent concentrations and specifications from country to country. (d) Codex methods of analysis which have been derived from scientific journals, theses, or publications, either not readily available or available in languages other than the official languages of FAO and WHO, or which for other reasons should be printed in the Codex Alimentarius in extenso, should follow the standard layout for methods of analysis as adopted by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling. (e) Methods of analysis which have already been printed as official methods of analysis in other available publications and which are adopted as Codex methods need only be quoted by reference in the Codex Alimentarius.
Document reference system.
UNIFORM SYSTEM OF REFERENCES FOR CODEX DOCUMENTS.
In referencing Codex documents, the Document Reference given in the table below appear first, followed by the year in which the session will be held, the session number, and finally the consecutive number of the document. For example, documents prepared for the 20th session of the Codex Committee on General Principles meeting in 2004, are identified by the series CX/GP 04/20/1, 2, 3 etc. Prior to 2003, most documents are identified by the Document Reference, year, and series number only (except for the Executive Committee). Statutory Body Codex Alimentarius Commission Executive Committee Codex Committees General Principles Food Additives and Contaminants Food Hygiene Food Labelling Methods of Analysis and Sampling Pesticide Residues Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses Cereals, Pulses and Legumes Cocoa Products and Chocolate CX/GP CX/FAC CX/FH CX/FL CX/MAS CX/PR CX/RVDF CX/FICS CX/NFSDU CX/CPL CX/CPC Document Reference ALINORM CX/EXEC.
Statutory Body Fats and Oils Fish and Fishery Products Milk and Milk Products Meat and Poultry Hygiene Natural Mineral Waters Processed Fruits and Vegetables Sugars Vegetable Proteins Fresh Fruits and Vegetables Regional Coordinating Committees Coordinating Committee for Africa Coordinating Committee for Asia Coordinating Committee for Europe Coordinating Committee for Latin America and the Caribbean Coordinating Committee for the Near East Coordinating Committee for North America and the South West Pacific Ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces Fruit Juices Animal Feeding Practices Statutory Bodies Abolished or Dissolved (for archival reference only) Ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods.
Document Reference CX/FO CX/FFP CX/MMP CX/MPH CX/NMW CX/PFV CX/S CX/VP CX/FFV.
CX/AFRICA CX/ASIA CX/EURO CX/LAC CX/NEA CX/NASWP.
CX/FJ CX/AF.
Statutory Body derived from Biotechnology Codex Committee on Edible Ices Codex Committee on Soups and Broths Codex Committee on Processed Meat and Poultry Products Joint ECE/Codex Alimentarius Group of Experts on the Standardization of Fruit Juices Joint ECE/Codex Alimentarius Group of Experts on the Standardization of Quick Frozen Foods.
Document Reference CX/IE CX/SB CX/PMPP CX/FJ CX/QFF.
Format for commodity standards.
FORMAT FOR CODEX COMMODITY STANDARDS.
The Format is also intended for use as a guide by the subsidiary bodies of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in presenting their standards, with the object of achieving, as far as possible, a uniform presentation of commodity standards. The Format also indicates the statements which should be included in standards as appropriate under the relevant headings of the standard. The sections of the Format require to be completed in a standard only insofar as such provisions are appropriate to an international standard for the food in question. NAME OF THE STANDARD SCOPE DESCRIPTION ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS FOOD ADDITIVES CONTAMINANTS HYGIENE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES LABELLING METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING.
NOTES ON THE HEADINGS.
NAME OF THE STANDARD The name of the standard should be clear and as concise as possible. It should usually be the common name by which the food covered by the standard is known or, if more than one food is dealt with in the standard, by a generic name covering them all. If a fully informative title should be inordinately long, a subtitle could be added. SCOPE This section should contain a clear, concise statement as to the food or foods to which the standard is applicable unless this is self-explanatory in the name of the standard. In the case of a general standard covering more than one specific 89.
product, it should be made clear as to which specific products the standard applies. D ESCRIPTION This section should contain a definition of the product or products with an indication, where appropriate, of the raw materials from which it is derived and any necessary references to processes of manufacture. It may also include references to types and styles of product and to type of pack. There may also be additional definitions when these are required to clarify the meaning of the standard. ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS This section should contain all quantitative and other requirements as to composition including, where necessary, identity characteristics, provisions on packing media and requirements as to compulsory and optional ingredients. It should also include quality factors which are essential for the designation, definition or composition of the product concerned. Such factors could include the quality of the raw material, with the object of protecting the health of the consumer, provisions on taste, odour, colour and texture which may be apprehended by the senses, and basic quality criteria for the finished products, with the object of preventing fraud. This section may refer to tolerances for defects, such as blemishes or imperfect material, but this information should be contained in an appendix to the standard or in another advisory text. FOOD ADDITIVES This section should contain the names of the additives permitted and, where appropriate, the maximum amount permitted in the food. It should be prepared in accordance with guidance given on page 96 and may take the following form: "The following provisions in respect of food additives and their specifications as contained in section ........ of the Codex Alimentarius are subject to endorsement [have been endorsed] by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants." Then should follow a tabulation, viz.: "Name of additive, maximum level (in percentage or mg/kg).".
C ONTAMINANTS Pesticide Residues: This section should include, by reference, any levels for pesticide residues that have been established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission for the product concerned. 16 Other Contaminants: In addition, this section should contain the names of other contaminants and where appropriate the maximum level permitted in the food, and the text to appear in the standard may take the following form: "The following provisions in respect of contaminants, other than pesticide residues, are subject to endorsement [have been endorsed] by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants." Then should follow a tabulation, viz.: "Name of contaminant, maximum level (in percentage or mg/kg)." HYGIENE Any specific mandatory hygiene provisions considered necessary should be included in this section. They should be prepared in accordance with the guidance given on page 97. Reference should also be made to applicable codes of hygienic practice. Any parts of such codes, including in particular any endproduct specifications, should be set out in the standard, if it is considered necessary that they should be made mandatory. The following statement should also appear: "The following provisions in respect of the food hygiene of this product are subject to endorsement [have been endorsed] by the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene." WEIGHTS AND MEASURES This section should include all provisions, other than labelling provisions, relating to weights and measures, e.g. where appropriate, fill of container, weight, measure or count of units determined by an appropriate method of sampling and analysis. Weights and measures should be expressed in S.I. units. In the case of standards which include provisions for the sale of products in standardized amounts, e.g. multiples of 100 grams, S.I. units should be used, but.
N.B. This Procedure has not been followed for practical reasons. Codex maximum limits for pesticide residues are published separately in Volume 2 of the Codex Alimentarius. 91.
this would not preclude additional statements in the standards of these standardized amounts in approximately similar amounts in other systems of weights and measures. LABELLING This section should include all the labelling provisions contained in the standard and should be prepared in accordance with the guidance given on page 95. Provisions should be included by reference to the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods. The section may also contain provisions which are exemptions from, additions to, or which are necessary for the interpretation of the General Standard in respect of the product concerned provided that these can be justified fully. The following statement should also appear: "The following provisions in respect of the labelling of this product are subject to endorsement [have been endorsed] by the Codex Committee on Food Labelling." METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING This section should include, either specifically or by reference, all methods of analysis and sampling considered necessary and should be prepared in accordance with the guidance given on page 97. If two or more methods have been proved to be equivalent by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling, these could be regarded as alternative and included in this section either specifically or by reference. The following statement should also appear: "The methods of analysis and sampling described hereunder are to be endorsed [have been endorsed] by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling." 17.
Methods of analysis should be indicated as being "defining", "reference", "alternative approved"or "tentative" methods, as appropriate. See page 73.
Relations between Committees.
RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMODITY COMMITTEES AND GENERAL COMMITTEES.
Codex Committees may ask the advice and guidance of committees having responsibility for matters applicable to all foods on any points coming within their province. The Codex Committees on Food Labelling; Food Additives and Contaminants; Methods of Analysis and Sampling; Food Hygiene; Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses; and Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems may establish general provisions on matters within their terms of reference. These provisions should only be incorporated into Codex Commodity Standards by reference unless there is a need for doing otherwise. Codex Commodity standards shall contain sections on hygiene, labelling and methods of analysis and sampling and these sections should contain all of the relevant provisions of the standard. Provisions of Codex General Standards, Codes or Guidelines shall only be incorporated into Codex Commodity Standards by reference unless there is a need for doing otherwise. Where Codex Committees are of the opinion that the general provisions are not applicable to one or more commodity standards, they may request the responsible Committees to endorse deviations from the general provisions of the Codex Alimentarius. Such requests should be fully justified and supported by available scientific evidence and other relevant information. Sections on hygiene, labelling, and methods of analysis and sampling which contain specific provisions or provisions supplementing the Codex General Standards, Codes or Guidelines shall be referred to the responsible Codex Committees at the most suitable time during Steps 3, 4 and 5 of the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards and Related Texts, though such reference should not be allowed to delay the progress of the standard to the subsequent steps of the Procedure. Subject and commodity Committees should refer to the principles and guidelines developed by the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems when developing provisions and/or recommendations on inspection and certification and make any appropriate amendments to the standards, guidelines and codes within the responsibility of the individual committees at the earliest convenient time.
FOOD LABELLING.
The provisions on food labelling should be included by reference to the Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 11985). Exemptions from, or additions to, the General Standard which are necessary for its interpretation in respect of the product concerned should be justified fully, and should be restricted as much as possible. Information specified in each draft standard should normally be limited to the following: a statement that the product shall be labelled in accordance with the Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1985) the specified name of the food date marking and storage instructions (only if the exemption foreseen in Section 4.7.1 of the General Standard is applied) Where the scope of the Codex Standard is not limited to prepackaged foods, a provision for labelling of non retail containers may be included. In such cases the provision may specify that:.
"Information on ...18 shall be given either on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification, and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container.19 However, lot identification, and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents.".
In respect of date marking (Section 4.7 of the General Standard), a Codex Committee may, in exceptional circumstances, determine another date or dates as defined in the General Standard, either to replace or to accompany the date of minimum durability, or alternatively decide that no date marking is necessary. In such cases, a full justification for the proposed action should be submitted to the Codex Committee on Food Labelling.
Codex Committees should decide which provisions are to be included. Codex Committees may decide that further information is required on the container. In this regard, special attention should be given to the need for storage instructions to be included on the container. 94.
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS.
Codex commodity committees should prepare a section on food additives in each draft commodity standard and this section should contain all the provisions in the standard relating to food additives. The section should include the names of those additives which are considered to be technologically necessary or which are widely permitted for use in the food within maximum levels where appropriate. All provisions in respect of food additives (including processing aids) and contaminants contained in Codex commodity standards should be referred to the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants preferably after the Standards have been advanced to Step 5 of the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards or before they are considered by the Commodity Committee concerned at Step 7, though such reference should not be allowed to delay the progress of the Standard to the subsequent Steps of the Procedure. All provisions in respect of food additives will require to be endorsed by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants, on the basis of technological justification submitted by the commodity committees and of the recommendations of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives concerning the safety-in-use (acceptable daily intake (ADI) and other restrictions) and an estimate of the potential and, where possible, the actual intake of the food additives, ensuring conformity with the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives. In preparing working papers for the Codex Committee on Food Additives, the Secretariat should make a report to the Committee concerning the endorsement of provisions for food additives (including processing aids), on the basis of the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives. Provisions for food additives should indicate the International Numbering System (INS) number, the ADI, technological justification, proposed level, and whether the additive was previously endorsed (or temporarily endorsed). When commodity standards are sent to governments for comment at Step 3, they should contain a statement that the provisions "in respect of food additives and contaminants are subject to endorsement by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants and to incorporation into the General Standard for Food Additives or the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Foods." When establishing provisions for food additives, Codex committees should follow the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives and the Preamble of the General Standard for Food Additives. Full explanation should be provided for any departure from the above recommendations. 95.
When an active commodity committee exists, proposals for the use of additives in any commodity standard under consideration should be prepared by the committee concerned, and forwarded to the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants for endorsement. When the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants decides not to endorse specific additives provisions (use of the additive, or level in the end-product), the reason should be clearly stated. The section under consideration should be referred back to the Committee concerned if further information is needed, or for information if the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants decides to amend the provision. When no active commodity committee exists, proposals for new additive provisions or amendment of existing provisions, should be forwarded directly by member countries to the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants. Good Manufacturing Practice means that: the quantity of the additive added to food does not exceed the amount reasonably required to accomplish its intended physical nutritional or other technical effect in food; the quantity of the additive that becomes a component of food as a result of its use in the manufacturing, processing or packaging of a food and which is not intended to accomplish any physical, or other technological effect in the food itself, is reduced to the extent reasonably possible; the additive is of appropriate food grade quality and is prepared and handled in the same way as a food ingredient. Food grade quality is achieved by compliance with the specifications as a whole and not merely with individual criteria in terms of safety.
FOOD HYGIENE.
Commodity Committees should use in the commodity standards the following text: It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969, Rev 3-1997), and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice.
The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997).
METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING.
NORMAL PRACTICE Except for methods of analysis and sampling associated with microbiological criteria, when Codex committees have included provisions on methods of analysis or sampling in a Codex commodity standard, these should be referred to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling at Step 4, to ensure Government comments at the earliest possible stage in the development of the standard. A Codex Committee should, whenever possible, provide to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling information, for each individual analytical method proposed, relating to specificity, accuracy, precision (repeatability, reproducibility) limit of detection, sensitivity, applicability and practicability, as appropriate. Similarly a Codex Committee should, whenever possible, provide to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling information for each sampling plan relating to the scope or field of application, the type of sampling (e.g. bulk or unit), sample sizes, decision rules, details of plans (e.g. "Operating characteristic" curves), inferences to be made to lots or processes, levels of risk to be accepted and pertinent supportive data. Other criteria may be selected as required. Methods of analysis should be proposed by the Commodity Committees in consultation if necessary with an expert body. At Step 4 Codex Commodity Committees should discuss and report to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling on matters connected with: Provisions in Codex standards which require analytical or statistical procedure; Provisions for which elaboration of specific methods of analysis or sampling are required; Provisions which are defined by the use of Defining Methods (Type I); All proposals to the extent possible should be supported by appropriate documentation; especially for Tentative Methods (Type IV); Any request for advice or assistance. 97.
The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling should undertake a coordinating role in matters relating to the elaboration of Codex methods of analysis and sampling. The originating committee is, however, responsible for carrying out the Steps of the Procedure. When it is necessary, the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling should try to ensure elaboration and collaborative testing of methods by other recognized bodies with expertise in the field of analysis. The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling will assess the actual analytical performance of the method which has been determined in its validation. This will take account of the appropriate precision characteristics obtained in collaborative trials which may have been carried out on the method together with results from other development work carried out during the course of the method development. The set of criteria that are developed will form part of the report of the endorsement by the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling and will be inserted in the appropriate Codex Commodity Standard. In addition, the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling will identify numeric values for the criteria for which it would wish such methods to comply. METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING OF GENERAL APPLICATION TO FOODS When the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling itself elaborates methods of analysis and sampling which are of general application to foods, it is responsible for carrying out the steps of the Procedure. METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF FOOD ADDITIVES AS SUCH Methods of analysis included in Codex Advisory Food Additives Specifications, for the purpose of verifying the criteria of purity and identity of the food additive, need not be referred to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling for endorsement. The Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants is responsible for carrying out the steps of the Procedure. METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOOD The methods for determining the levels of pesticide residues in food need not be referred to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling for endorsement. The Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues is responsible for carrying out the steps of the Procedure.
MICROBIOLOGICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING When Codex committees have included provisions on microbiological methods of analysis and sampling for the purpose of verifying hygiene provisions, they should be referred to the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene at the most suitable time during Steps 3, 4 and 5 of the Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards, which will ensure that government comments on the methods of analysis and sampling are available to the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene. The procedure to be followed will be as in the normal practice described above, substituting the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene for the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling. Microbiological methods of analysis and sampling elaborated by the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene for inclusion in Codex commodity standards for the purpose of verifying hygiene provisions need not be referred to the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling for endorsement.
Core functions of Contact Points.
CORE FUNCTIONS OF CODEX CONTACT POINTS.
The operation of Codex Contact Points will differ in each country depending on national legislation, government structures and practices. CODEX CONTACT POINTS:.
2. Act as the link between the Codex Secretariat and Member countries; Coordinate all relevant Codex activities within their own countries;.
Receive all Codex final texts (standards, codes of practice, guidelines and other advisory texts) and working documents of Codex sessions and ensure that they are circulated to those concerned within their own countries;.
Send comments on Codex documents or proposals to the Codex Alimentarius Commission or its subsidiary bodies and/or the Codex Secretariat;.
Work in close cooperation with the national Codex committee, where such a committee has been established. The Codex Contact Point acts as the liaison point with the food industry, consumers, traders and all other concerned to ensure that the government is provided with an appropriate balance of policy and technical advice upon which to base decisions relating to issues raised in the context of the Codex work;.
Act as a channel for the exchange of information and coordination of activities with other Codex Members;.
Receive the invitation to Codex sessions and inform the relevant chairpersons and the Codex Secretariat of the names of participants from their own countries;.
9. Maintain a library of Codex final texts; and Promote Codex activities throughout their own countries.
Section III.
SECTION III Subsidiary Bodies Membership Contact Points Organigram.
Contents of this Section This Section contains factual information about the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including a list of the Commission's Sessions and sessions of the Executive Committee. The list of the Commission's Subsidiary Bodies gives the Terms of Reference of all Codex Committees established under Rule IX.1 of the Commission's Rules of Procedure. Each body (including the Commission and the Executive Committee) is also identified by its unique reference code used in all official correspondence. The meetings of each Committee are listed. The structure of the Commission's subsidiary bodies is shown diagrammatically on the inside back cover. The countries which form the Commission's Membership are listed (as of July 1999) together with a list of the national Codex Contact Points. These lists are subject to frequent changes. The Secretariat of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme provides up-dated information at regular intervals.
Commission sessions.
SESSIONS OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
(CX-701)20 SESSION 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th.
PLACE AND DATES Rome, Italy, 25 June - 3 July 1963 Geneva, Switzerland, 28 September - 7 October 1964 Rome, Italy, 19-28 October 1965 Rome, Italy, 7-14 November 1966 Rome, Italy, 20 February - 1 March 1968 Geneva, Switzerland, 4-14 March 1969 Rome, Italy, 7-17 April 1970 Geneva, Switzerland, 30 June - 9 July 1971 Rome, Italy, 6-17 November 1972 Rome, Italy, 1-11 July 1974 Rome, Italy, 29 March - 9 April 1976 Rome, Italy, 17-28 April 1978 Rome, Italy, 3-14 December 1979 Geneva, Switzerland, 29 June - 10 July 1981 Rome, Italy 4-15 July 1983 Geneva Switzerland, 1-12 July 1985 Rome, Italy, 29 June - 10 July 1987 Geneva, Switzerland, 3-12 July 1989 Rome, Italy, 1-10 July 1991 Geneva, Switzerland, 28 June - 7 July 1993 Rome, Italy, 3-8 July 1995 Geneva, Switzerland, 23-28 June 1997 Rome, Italy, 28 June - 3 July 1999 Geneva, Switzerland, 2 - 7 July 2001 Geneva, Switzerland, 13 - 15 February 200321.
The reference code, followed by the number of the session, used in official correspondence. Extraordinary session.
SESSION 26th.
PLACE AND DATES Rome, Italy, 30 June - 7 July 2003.
Executive Committee sessions.
SESSIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
(CX -702) SESSION 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th 31st 32nd.
SESSION 3 3 rd 34th 35th 36th 37th 38th 39th 40th 41st 42nd 43rd 44th 45th 46th 47th 48th 49th 50th 51st 52nd.
PLACE AND DATES Rome, Italy, 30 June  4 July 1986 Rome, Italy, 26-26 June 1987 Geneva, Switzerland, 4-8 July 1988 Geneva, Switzerland, 29-30 June 1989 Rome, Italy, 3-6 July 1990 Rome, Italy, 27-28 June 1991 Geneva, Switzerland, 30 June-3 July 1992 Geneva, Switzerland, 24-25 June 1993 Rome, Italy, 28-30 June 1994 Rome, Italy, 28-30 June 1995 Geneva, Switzerland, 4-7 June 1996 Geneva, Switzerland, 19-20 June 1997 Rome, Italy, 3-5 June 1998 Rome, Italy, 24-25 June 1999 Geneva, Switzerland, 28-30 June 2000 Geneva, Switzerland, 28-29 June 2001 Geneva, Switzerland, 26-27 September 200122 Rome, Italy, 26-28 June 2002 Geneva, Switzerland, 10-11 February 200322 Rome, Italy, 26-27 June 2003.
Extraordinary session.
Subsidiary bodies.
SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
SUBSIDIARY BODY UNDER RULE X.1(A).
Terms of Reference: To establish international codes and standards concerning milk and milk products.
SUBSIDIARY BODIES UNDER RULE X.1(B)(I).
CODEX COMMITTEE ON GENERAL PRINCIPLES (CX-716) Host Government: France Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th Paris, 4-8 October 1965 Paris, 16-19 October 1967 Paris, 9-13 December 1968 Paris, 4-8 March 1974 Paris, 19-23 January 1976 Paris, 15-19 October 1979 Paris, 6-10 April 1981 Paris, 24-28 November 1986 Paris, 24-28 April 1989 Paris, 7-11 September 1992 Paris, 25-29 April 1994 Paris, 25-28 November 1996 Paris, 7-11 September 1998 Paris, 19-23 April 1999 Paris, 10-14 April 2000 Paris, 23-27 April 2001 Paris, 15-19 April 2002 Paris, 7-11 April 2003.
Terms of Reference: To deal with such procedural and general matters as are referred to it by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. Such matters have included the establishment of the General Principles which define the purpose and scope of the Codex Alimentarius, the nature of Codex standards and the forms of acceptance by countries of Codex standards; the development of Guidelines for Codex Committees; the development of a mechanism for examining any economic impact statements submitted by governments concerning possible implications for their economies of some of the individual standards or some of.
the provisions thereof; the establishment of a Code of Ethics for the International Trade in Food. CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS (CX-711) Host Government: Netherlands Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th 31st 32nd 33rd 34th 35th.
20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th 31st 32nd 33rd 34th 35th Terms of reference: (a).
Washington D.C., 1-5 October 1984 Washington D.C., 23-27 September 1985 Washington D.C., 20-24 October 1986 Washington D.C., 21-25 March 1988 Washington D.C., 16-20 October 1989 Washington D.C., 28 October - 1 November 1991 Washington D.C., 1-5 March 1993 Washington D.C., 17-21 October 1994 Washington D.C., 27 November - 1 December 1995 Washington D.C., 21-25 October 1996 Washington D.C., 20-24 October 1997 Orlando, Florida, 26-30 October 1998 Washington D.C., 29 November - 4 December 1999 Washington D.C., 23-28 October 2000 Bangkok, Thailand, 8-13 October 2001 Orlando, Florida, 27 January-1 February 2003.
to draft basic provisions on food hygiene applicable to all food23;.
(b) to consider, amend if necessary and endorse provisions on hygiene prepared by Codex commodity committees and contained in Codex commodity standards, and (c) to consider, amend if necessary, and endorse provisions on hygiene prepared by Codex commodity committees and contained in Codex codes of practice unless, in specific cases, the Commission has decided otherwise, or (d) to draft provisions on hygiene applicable to specific food items or food groups, whether coming within the terms of reference of a Codex commodity committee or not; (e) to consider specific hygiene problems assigned to it by the Commission; (f) to suggest and prioritize areas where there is a need for microbiological risk assessment at the international level and to develop questions to be addressed by the risk assessors;.
The term "hygiene" includes, where necessary, microbiological specifications for food and associated methodology. 110.
Terms of reference: (a) to draft provisions on labelling applicable to all foods; (b) to consider, amend if necessary, and endorse draft specific provisions on labelling prepared by the Codex Committees drafting standards, codes of practice and guidelines; (c) to study specific labelling problems assigned to it by the Commission; (d) to study problems associated with the advertisement of food with particular reference to claims and misleading descriptions. CODEX COMMITTEE ON METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING (CX-715) Host Government: Federal Republic of Germany (1st to 6th sessions), Hungary Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th.
Berlin, 23-24 September 1965 Berlin, 20-23 September 1966 Berlin, 24-27 October 1967 Berlin, 11-15 November 1968 Cologne, 1-6 December 1969 Bonn Bad Godesberg, 24-28 January 1971 Budapest, 12-18 September 1972 Budapest, 3-7 September 1973 Budapest, 27-31 October 1975 Budapest, 24-28 October 1977 Budapest, 2-6 July 1979 Budapest, 11-15 May 1981 Budapest, 29 November - 3 December 1982 Budapest, 26-30 November 1984 Budapest, 10-14 November 1986 Budapest, 14-19 November 1988 Budapest, 8-12 April 1991 Budapest, 9-13 November 1992 Budapest, 21-25 March 1994 Budapest, 2-6 October 1995 Budapest, 10-14 March 1997 Budapest, 23-27 November 1998 Budapest, 26 February  March 2001 Budapest, 18-22 November 2002.
Terms of reference: (a) to define the criteria appropriate to Codex Methods of Analysis and Sampling; (b) to serve as a coordinating body for Codex with other international groups working in methods of analysis and sampling and quality assurance systems for laboratories; (c) to specify, on the basis of final recommendations submitted to it by the other bodies referred to in (b) above, Reference Methods of Analysis and Sampling appropriate to Codex Standards which are generally applicable to a number of foods; (d) to consider, amend, if necessary, and endorse, as appropriate, methods of analysis and sampling proposed by Codex (Commodity) Committees, except that methods of analysis and sampling for residues of pesticides or veterinary drugs in food, the assessment of micro biological quality and safety in food, and the assessment of specifications for food additives, do not fall within the terms of reference of this Committee; (e) to elaborate sampling plans and procedures, as may be required; (f) to consider specific sampling and analysis problems submitted to it by the Commission or any of its Committees; (g) to define procedures, protocols, guidelines or related texts for the assessment of food laboratory proficiency, as well as quality assurance systems for laboratories. CODEX COMMITTEE ON PESTICIDE RESIDUES (CX-718) Host Government: Netherlands Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th The Hague, 17-21 January 1966 The Hague, 18-22 September 1967 Arnhem, 30 September-4 October 1968 Arnhem, 6-14 October 1969 The Hague, 28 September - 6 October 1970 The Hague, 16-23 October 1972 The Hague, 4-9 February 1974 The Hague, 3-8 March 1975 The Hague, 14-21 February 1977.
10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th 31st 32nd 33rd 34th 35th.
Terms of reference: (a) to establish maximum limits for pesticide residues in specific food items or in groups of food; (b) to establish maximum limits for pesticide residues in certain animal feeding stuffs moving in international trade where this is justified for reasons of protection of human health; (c) to prepare priority lists of pesticides for evaluation by the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR); (d) to consider methods of sampling and analysis for the determination of pesticide residues in food and feed;.
(e) to consider other matters in relation to the safety of food and feed containing pesticide residues; and (f) to establish maximum limits for environmental and industrial contaminants showing chemical or other similarity to pesticides, in specific food items or groups of food. CODEX COMMITTEE ON RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS (CX -730) Host Government: United States of America Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th Washington, D.C. 27-31 October, 1986 Washington, D.C. 30 November - 4 December 1987 Washington, D.C. 31 October - 4 November 1988 Washington, D.C. 24-27 October 1989 Washington, D.C. 16-19 October 1990 Washington, D.C. 22-25 October 1991 Washington, D.C., 20-23 October 1992 Washington, D.C., 7-10 June 1994 Washington, D.C., 5-8 December 1995 San Jos (Costa Rica), 29 October - 1 November 1996 Washington D.C., 15-18 September 1998 Washington, D.C., 28-31 March 2000 Charleston, South Carolina, 4 - 7 December 2001 Arlington, Virginia, 4 - 7 March 2003.
Terms of reference: (a) to determine priorities for the consideration of residues of veterinary drugs in foods; (b) to recommend maximum levels of such substances; (c) to develop codes of practice as may be required; (d) to consider methods of sampling and analysis for the determination of veterinary drug residues in foods.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT CERTIFICATION AND INSPECTION SYSTEMS (CX-733) Host Government, Australia Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th Canberra, 21-25 September 1992 Canberra, 29 November-3 December 1993 Canberra, 27 February-3 March 1995 Sydney, 19-23 February 1996 Sydney, 17-21 February 1997 Melbourne, 23-27 February 1998 Melbourne, 22-26 February 1999 Adelaide, 21-25 February 2000 Perth, 11-15 December 2000 Brisbane, 25 February - 1 March 2002 Adelaide, 2-6 December 2002.
Terms of reference: (a) to develop principles and guidelines for food import and export inspection and certification systems with a view to harmonising methods and procedures which protect the health of consumers, ensure fair trading practices and facilitate international trade in foodstuffs; (b) to develop principles and guidelines for the application of measures by the competent authorities of exporting and importing countries to provide assurance where necessary that foodstuffs comply with requirements, especially statutory health requirements; (c) to develop guidelines for the utilisation, as and when appropriate, of quality assurance systems24 to ensure that foodstuffs conform with requirements and to promote the recognition of these systems in facilitating trade in food products under bilateral/multilateral arrangements by countries; (d) to develop guidelines and criteria with respect to format, declarations and language of such official certificates as countries may require with a view towards international harmonization;.
Quality assurance means all those planned and systematic actions necessary to.
provide adequate confidence that a product or service will satisfy given requirements for quality (ISO-8402 Quality - Vocabulary) 116.
Terms of reference: (a) to study specific nutritional problems assigned to it by the Commission and advise the Commission on general nutrition issues; (b) to draft general provisions, as appropriate, concerning the nutritional aspects of all foods; (c) to develop standards, guidelines or related texts for foods for special dietary uses, in cooperation with other committees where necessary; (d) to consider, amend if necessary, and endorse provisions on nutritional aspects proposed for inclusion Codex standards, guidelines and related texts. CODEX COMMITTEE ON COCOA PRODUCTS AND CHOCOLATE (CX-708) Host Government: Switzerland Sessions: Neuchtel, 5-6 November 1963 1st Montreux, 22-24 April 1964 2nd Zrich, 10-12 March 1965 3 rd Berne, 15-17 March 1966 4th Lugano, 9-12 May 1967 5th th Montreux, 2-5 July 1968 6 Horgen, (Zrich), 23-27 June 1969 7th Lucerne, 29 June - 3 July 1970 8th Neuchtel, 27 September - 1 October 1971 9th Lausanne, 7-11 May 1973 10th Zrich, 2-6 December 1974 11th Bienne, 1-5 November 1976 12th Aarau, 2-6 April 1979 13th Lausanne, 21-25 April 1980 14th Neuchtel, 29 March - 2 April 1982 15th Thun, 30 September - 2 October 1996 16th th Berne, 16-18 November 1998 17 Fribourg, 2-4 November 2000 18th Fribourg, 3-5 October 2001 19th Adjourned sine die Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for cocoa products and chocolate.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON SUGARS (CX-710) Host Government: United Kingdom Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th London, 3-5 March 1964 London, 2-4 March 1965 London, 1-3 March 1966 London, 18-21 April 1967 London, 10-12 September 1968 London, 19-22 March 1974 London, 9-11 February 2000.
19th 20th 21st.
Washington, D.C., 16-20 March 1998 Washington, D.C., 11-15 September 2000 San Antonio, Texas, 23-27 September 2002.
Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for all types of processed fruits and vegetables including dried products, canned dried peas and beans, jams and jellies, but not dried prunes, or fruit and vegetable juices. The Commission has also allocated to this Committee the work of revision of standards for quick frozen fruits and vegetables (see page 138). CODEX COMMITTEE ON FATS AND OILS (CX-709) Host Government: United Kingdom Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th London, 25-27 February 1964 London, 6-8 April 1965 London, 29 March - 1 April 1966 London, 24-28 April 1967 London, 16-20 September 1968 Madrid, 17-20 November 1969 London, 25-29 March 1974 London, 24-28 November 1975 London, 28 November - 2 December 1977 London, 4-8 December 1978 London, 23-27 June 1980 London, 19-23 April 1982 London, 23-27 February 1987 London, 27 September - 1 October 1993 London, 4-8 November 1996 London, 8-12 March 1999 London, 19-23 February 2001 London, 3-7 February 2003.
Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for fats and oils of animal, vegetable and marine origin including margarine and olive oil.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON MEAT (CX-717) Host Government: Federal Republic of Germany Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th Kulmbach, 28-30 October 1965 Kulmbach, 5-8 July 1966 Kulmbach, 15-17 November 1967 Kulmbach, 18-20 June 1969 Bonn, 16-20 November 1970 Kulmbach, 1-5 November 1971 Kulmbach, 25-29 June 1973.
Dissolved by the 16th Session of the Commission in 1985. Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards and/or descriptive texts and/or codes of practice as may seem appropriate for the classification, description and grading of carcasses and cuts of beef, veal, mutton, lamb and pork. CODEX COMMITTEE ON MEAT HYGIENE (CX-723) Established as the Codex Committee on Meat Hygiene by the 8th Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (1971). The terms of reference and the name of the Committee were amended by the 24th Session of the Commission (2001) to include poultry. The specific reference to poultry was removed by the 26th Session of the Commission (2003). Host Government: New Zealand Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th London, 10-15 April 1972 London, 18-22 June 1973 London, 25-29 November 1974 London, 18-22 May 1981 London, 11-15 October 1982 Rome, 14-18 October 1991 Rome, 29 March - 2 April 1993 Wellington, 18-22 February 2002 Wellington, 17-21 February 2003.
Terms of reference: To elaborate world-wide standards and/or codes of practice as appropriate for meat hygiene. CODEX COMMITTEE ON PROCESSED MEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTS (CX -721) Host Government: Denmark Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th Kulmbach, 4-5 July 1966 Copenhagen, 2-6 October 1967 Copenhagen, 24-28 June 1968 Copenhagen, 9-13 June 1969 Copenhagen, 23-27 November 1970 Copenhagen, 17-21 April 1972 Copenhagen, 3-7 December 1973 Copenhagen, 10-14 March 1975 Copenhagen, 29 November - 3 December 1976 Copenhagen, 20-24 November 1978 Copenhagen, 22-26 September 1980 Copenhagen, 4-8 October 1982 Copenhagen, 23-26 October 1984 Copenhagen, 12-16 September 1988 Copenhagen, 8-12 October 1990.
Abolished by the 23rd Session of the Commission (1999). Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for processed meat products, including consumer packaged meat, and for processed poultry meat products. CODEX COMMITTEE ON FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS (CX-722) Host Government: Norway Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th.
Bergen, 29 August - 2 September 1966 Bergen, 9-13 October 1967 Bergen, 7-11 October 1968 Bergen, 29 September 8 - October 1969.
5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th.
Bergen, 5-10 October 1970 Bergen, 4-8 October 1971 Bergen, 2-7 October 1972 Bergen, 1-6 October 1973 Bergen, 30 September - 5 October 1974 Bergen, 29 September - 4 October 1975 Bergen, 27 September - 2 October 1976 Bergen, 3-8 October 1977 Bergen, 7-11 May 1979 Bergen, 5-10 May 1980 Bergen, 3-8 May 1982 Bergen, 7-11 May 1984 Oslo, 5-9 May 1986 Bergen, 2-6 May 1988 Bergen, 11-15 June 1990 Bergen, 1-5 June 1992 Bergen, 2-6 May 1994 Bergen, 6-10 May 1996 Bergen, 8-12 June 1998 lesund, 5-9 June 2000 lesund, 3-7 June 2002.
Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for fresh, frozen (including quick frozen) or otherwise processed fish, crustaceans and molluscs. CODEX COMMITTEE ON EDIBLE ICES (CX-724) Host Government: Sweden Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd Stockholm, 18-22 February 1974 Stockholm, 23-27 June 1975 Stockholm, 11-15 October 1976.
Abolished by the 22nd Session of the Commission 1997. Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards as appropriate for all types of edible ices, including mixes and powders used for their manufacture.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON SOUPS AND BROTHS (CX-726) Host Government: Switzerland Sessions: 1st 2nd Berne, 3-7 November 1975 St. Gallen, 7-11 November 1977.
Abolished by the 24th Session of the Commission 2001 Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for soups, broths, bouillons and consomms. CODEX COMMITTEE ON CEREALS, PULSES AND LEGUMES (CX-729) Host Government: United States of America Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th Washington, D.C., 24-28 March 1980 Washington, D.C., 27 April - 1 May 1981 Washington, D.C., 25-29 October 1982 Washington, D.C., 24-28 September 1984 Washington, D.C., 17-21 March 1986 Washington, D.C., 24-28 October 1988 Washington, D.C., 22-26 October 1990 Washington, D.C., 26-30 October 1992 Washington, D.C., 31 October - 4 November 1994.
Adjourned sine die. Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards and/or codes of practice as may be appropriate for cereals, pulses, legumes and their products. CODEX COMMITTEE ON VEGETABLE PROTEINS (CX-728) Host Government: Canada Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd.
Ottawa, 3-7 November 1980 Ottawa, 1-5 March 1983 Ottawa, 6-10 February 1984.
Havana, 2-6 February 1987 Ottawa, 6-10 February 1989.
Adjourned sine die. Terms of reference: To elaborate definitions and world wide standards for vegetable protein products deriving from any member of the plant kingdom as they come into use for human consumption, and to elaborate guidelines on utilization of such vegetable protein products in the food supply system, on nutritional requirements and safety, on labelling and on other aspects as may seem appropriate. CODEX COMMITTEE ON FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES (CX-731) Established by the 17th Session of the Commission (1987) as the Codex Committee on Tropical Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Its name and Terms of Reference were amended by the 21st Session of the Commission (1995). Host Government: Mexico Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th Mexico City, 6-10 June 1988 Mexico City, 5-9 March 1990 Mexico City, 23-27 September 1991 Mexico City, 1-5 February 1993 Mexico City, 5-9 September 1994 Mexico City, 29 January - 2 February 1996 Mexico City, 8-12 September 1997 Mexico City, 1-5 March 1999 Mexico City, 9-13 October 2000 Mexico City, 10-14 June 2002.
Terms of Reference: (a) to elaborate world wide standards and codes of practice as may be appropriate for fresh fruits and vegetables; (b) to consult with the UN/ECE Working Party on Standardization of Perishable Produce in the elaboration of world wide standards and codes of.
practice with particular regard to ensuring that there is no duplication of standards or codes of practice and that they follow the same broad format25; (c) to consult, as necessary, with other international organizations which are active in the area of standardization of fresh fruits and vegetables. CODEX COMMITTEE ON MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS (CX-703) Host Government: New Zealand Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th Rome, 28 November - 2 December 1994 Rome, 27-31 May 1996 Montevideo (Uruguay), 18-22 May 1998 Wellington, 28 February  March 2000 Wellington, 8-12 April 2002.
Terms of reference: To elaborate world-wide standards, codes and related texts for milk and milk products.
The Working Party on Standardization of Perishable Produce of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe:.
may recommend that a world wide Codex standard for fresh fruits and vegetables should be elaborated and submit its recommendation either to the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables for consideration or to the Commission for approval;.
may prepare "proposed draft standards" for fresh fruits or vegetables at the request of the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables or of the Commission for distribution by the Codex Secretariat at Step 3 of the Codex Procedure, and for further action by the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables;.
may wish to consider "proposed draft standards" and "draft standards" for fresh fruits and vegetables and transmit comments on them to the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables at Steps 3 and 6 of the Codex Procedure; and.
may perform specific tasks in relation to the elaboration of standards for fresh fruits and vegetables at the request of the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex "proposed draft standards" and "draft standards" for fresh fruits and vegetables at Steps 3 and 6 of the Codex Procedure should be submitted to the UN/ECE Secretariat for obtaining comments. 126.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON NATURAL MINERAL WATERS (CX-719) The Committee was established by the Commission as a Regional (European) Codex Committee, but has since been allocated the task of elaborating worldwide standards for natural mineral waters and bottled (packaged) water other than natural mineral water. Host Government: Switzerland Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th Badan/Aarzan, 24-25 February 1966 Montreux, 6-7 July 1967 Bad Ragaz, - 9 May 1968 Vienna, 12-13 June 1972 Thun, 3-5 October 1996 Berne, 19-21 November 1998 Fribourg, 30 October  1 November 2000.
Adjourned sine die. Terms of reference: To elaborate regional standards for natural mineral waters.
AD HOC CODEX INTERGOVERNMENTAL TASK FORCES UNDER RULE X.1(B)(I).
AD HOC CODEX INTERGOVERNMENTAL TASK FORCE ON FRUIT AND.
VEGETABLE JUICES (CX-801) Host Government: Brazil Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd Braslia, 18-22 September 2000 Rio de Janeiro, 23-26 April 2002 Salvador (Bahia), 6 - 10 May 2003.
Terms of Reference: The ad hoc Task Force shall: (a) revise and consolidate the existing Codex standards and guidelines for fruit and vegetable juices and related products, giving preference to general standards;.
(b) revise and up-date the methods of analysis and sampling for these products; (c) complete its work prior to the 28th Session of the Commission (2005).
AD HOC CODEX INTERGOVERNMENTAL TASK FORCE ON FOODS DERIVED.
FROM BIOTECHNOLOGY (CX-802).
Host Government: Japan Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th Chiba, 14-17 March 2000 Chiba, 25-29 March 2001 Yokohama, 4-8 March 2002 Yokohama, 11-14 March 2003.
Dissolved by the 26th Session of the Commission (2003) upon completion of its mandate. Objectives To develop standards, guidelines or recommendations, as appropriate, for foods derived from biotechnology or traits introduced into foods by biotechnology, on the basis of scientific evidence, risk analysis and having regard, where appropriate, to other legitimate factors relevant to the health of consumers and the promotion of fair trade practices. Time frame The Task Force shall complete its work within four years. The Task Force should first submit a preliminary report to the Commission in 2001, a mid-term report, where appropriate, to the Executive Committee in 2002, and a full report in 2003. Terms of Reference (a) To elaborate standards, guidelines, or other principles, as appropriate, for foods derived from biotechnology; (b) To coordinate and closely collaborate, as necessary, with appropriate Codex Committees within their mandate as relates to foods derived from biotechnology; and (c) To take full account of existing work carried out by national authorities, FAO, WHO, other international organizations and other relevant international fora.
AD HOC CODEX INTERGOVERNMENTAL TASK FORCE ON ANIMAL FEEDING.
(CX -803) Host Government: Denmark Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th Objectives With the aim of ensuring the safety and quality of foods of animal origin, the Task Force should develop guidelines or standards as appropriate on Good Animal Feeding practices. Time Frame The Task Force shall complete its work within four years. The Task Force should first submit a preliminary report to the Commission in 2001 and a full report in 2003. The mandate of the Task Force was extended by one year by the 26th Session of the Commission (2003) in order to allow completion of its work. Terms of Reference (a) To complete and extend the work already done by relevant Codex Committees on the Draft Code of Practice for Good Animal Feeding. (b) To address other aspects which are important for food safety, such as problems related to toxic substances, pathogens, microbial resistance, new technologies, storage, control measures, traceability, etc. (c) To take full account of and collaborate with, as appropriate, work carried out by relevant Codex Committees, and other relevant international bodies, including FAO, WHO, OIE and IPPC. Copenhagen, 13-15 June 2000 Copenhagen, 19-21 March 2001 Copenhagen, 17-20 June 2002 Copenhagen, 25-28 March 2003.
SUBSIDIARY BODIES UNDER RULE X.1(B)(II).
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA (CX-707) Membership: Membership of the Committee is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO which are members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, within the geographic location of Africa. Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region; (g) exercises a general coordinating role for the region and such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Commission; (h) promotes the acceptance of Codex standards and maximum limits for residues by member countries. Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th.
Rome, 24-27 June 1974 Accra, 15-19 September 1975 Accra, 26-30 September 1977 Dakar, 3-7 September 1979 Dakar, 25-29 May 1981 Nairobi, 31 October - 5 November 1983 Nairobi, 12-18 February 1985.
8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th.
Cairo, 29 November - 3 December 1988 Cairo, 3-7 December 1990 Abuja, 3-6 November 1992 Abuja, 8-11 May 1995 Harare, 19-22 November 1996 Harare, 3-6 November 1998 Kampala, 27-30 November 2000 Kampala, 26-29 November 2002.
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR ASIA (CX-727) Membership: Membership of the Committee is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO which are members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, within the geographic location of Asia. Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region; (g) exercises a general coordinating role for the region and such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Commission; (h) promotes the acceptance of Codex standards and maximum limits for residues by member countries.
Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th New Delhi, 10-16 January 1977 Manila, 20-26 March 1979 Colombo, 2-8 February 1982 Phetchburi, 28 February - 5 March 1984 Yogyakarta, 8-14 April 1986 Denpasar, 26 January - 1 February 1988 Chiang-Mai, 5-12 February 1990 Kuala Lumpur, 27-31 January 1992 Beijing, 24-27 May 1994 Tokyo, 5-8 March 1996 Chiang Rai, 16-19 December 1997 Chaing-Mai, 23-26 November 1999 Kuala Lumpur, 17-20 September 2002.
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR EUROPE (CX-706) Membership: This Committee is open to all Member Governments of FAO and/or WHO within the geographic area of Europe, including Israel, Turkey and the Russian Federation and its Chairperson is, ex officio, the Coordinator for Europe. Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region;.
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (CX-725) Membership: Membership of the Committee is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO which are members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, within the geographic location of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region; (g) exercises a general coordinating role for the region and such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Commission; (h) promotes the acceptance of Codex standards and maximum limits for residues by member countries. Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th Rome, 25-26 March 1976 Montevideo, 9-15 December 1980 Havana, 27 March - 2 April 1984 Havana, 17-22 April 1985 Havana, 11-16 February 1987 San Jos, 20-24 February 1989 San Jos, 1-10 July 1991 Braslia, 16-20 March 1993 Braslia, 3-7 April 1995 Montevideo, 25-28 February 1997 Montevideo, 8-11 December 1998 Santo Domingo, 13-16 February 2001 Santo Domingo, 9-13 December 2002.
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE NEAR EAST (CX-734) Membership: Membership of the Committee is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO that are members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, within the geographic locations of the Near East as defined by FAO or the Eastern Mediterranean by WHO. Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region; (g) exercises a general coordinating role for the region and such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Commission; (h) promotes the acceptance of Codex standards and maximum limits for residues by member countries. Sessions: 1st 2nd Cairo, 29 January - 1 February 2001 Cairo, 20-23 January 2003.
FAO/WHO COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NORTH AMERICA AND THE SOUTH WEST PACIFIC (CX-732) Membership: Membership of the Committee is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO which are members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, with the geographic locations of North America and the South West Pacific. Terms of reference: (a) defines the problems and needs of the region concerning food standards and food control; (b) promotes within the Committee contacts for the mutual exchange of information on proposed regulatory initiatives and problems arising from food control and stimulates the strengthening of food control infrastructures; (c) recommends to the Commission the development of world wide standards for products of interest to the region, including products considered by the Committee to have an international market potential in the future; (d) develops regional standards for food products moving exclusively or almost exclusively in intra regional trade; (e) draws the attention of the Commission to any aspects of the Commission's work of particular significance to the region; (f) promotes coordination of all regional food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations within the region; (g) exercises a general coordinating role for the region and such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Commission; (h) promotes the acceptance of Codex standards and maximum limits for residues by member countries. Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th.
Honolulu, 30 April - 4 May 1990 Canberra, 2-6 December 1991 Vancouver, 31 May - 3 June 1994 Rotorua, 30 April - 3 May 1996 Seattle, 6-9 October 1998 Perth, 5-8 December 2000 Vancouver, 29 October - 1 November 2002.
JOINT ECE/CODEX ALIMENTARIUS GROUPS OF EXPERTS ON STANDARDIZATION26 Quick Frozen Foods (CX-705) Sessions: 1st 2nd 3 rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th Geneva, 6-10 September 1965 Geneva, 5-9 September 1966 Rome, 18-22 September 1967 Geneva, 2-6 September 1968 Rome, 22-26 September 1969 Rome, 27-31 July 1970 Geneva, 6-10 December 1971 Geneva, 30 April - 4 May 1973 Rome, 7-11 October 1974 Geneva, 6-10 October 1975 Geneva, 14-18 March 1977 Rome, 30 October - 6 November 1978 Rome, 15-19 September 1980.
Abolished by the 23rd Session of the Commission (1999). The work of the Joint Group of Experts was transferred to the Codex Committee on Processed Fruits and Vegetables (see page 120). Terms of reference: The Joint ECE/Codex Alimentarius Group of Experts on the Standardization of Quick Frozen Foods will be responsible for the development of standards for quick frozen foods in accordance with the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius. The Joint Group will be responsible for general considerations, definitions, a framework of individual standards for quick frozen food products and for the actual elaboration of standards for quick frozen food products not specifically allotted by the Commission to another Codex Committee, such as Fish and Fishery Products, Meat, Processed Meat and Poultry Products.
These Joint ECE/Codex Alimentarius committees were not subsidiary bodies under any specific rule of the Codex Alimentarius Commission but follow the same procedure as Codex Commodity Committees for the elaboration of Codex standards. 137.
Standards drawn up by Codex commodity committees for quick frozen foods should be in accordance with the general standard laid down by the Joint ECE/Codex Alimentarius Group of Experts on the Standardization of Quick Frozen Foods and should, at an appropriate stage, be referred to it for coordination purposes. Fruit Juices (CX-704) Sessions: Geneva, 6-10 April 1964 1st Geneva, 29 March - 2 April 1965 2nd Geneva, 21-25 February 1966 3 rd Geneva, 10-14 April 1967 4th Rome, 25-29 March 1968 5th th Geneva, 27-31 October 1969 6 Rome, 20-24 July 1970 7th Geneva, 8-12 March 1971 8th Rome, 20-24 March 1972 9th Geneva, 16-20 July 1973 10th Rome, 14-18 October 1974 11th th Geneva, 19-23 July 1976 12 Geneva, 26-30 June 1978 13th Geneva, 9-13 June 1980 14th Rome, 8-12 February 1982 15th Geneva, 30 April - 4 May 1984 16th th Rome, 26-30 May 1986 17 Geneva, 16-20 May 1988 18th Rome 12-16 November 1990 19th Abolished by the 23rd Session of the Commission (1999). The work of the Joint Group was transferred to the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Fruit Juices (see page 128). Terms of reference: To elaborate world wide standards for fruit juices, concentrated fruit juices and nectars.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
Africa.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Congo, Democratic Rep. Congo, Republic of Cte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. Asia 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. Europe 67. 68. Albania Armenia.
South Africa Swaziland Togo Uganda United Republic of Tanzania Zambia Zimbabwe.
Bangladesh Brunei Darussalam Bhutan Cambodia China Democratic People's Republic of Korea India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Republic of Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Viet Nam.
Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation Serbia and Montenegro Slovak Republic Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Turkey United Kingdom.
Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Suriname Trinidad and Tobago Uruguay Venezuela.
Near East 139. 140. 141. 142. 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Latin America and the Caribbean 107. Antigua and Barbuda.
Mauritania Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Sudan Syrian Arab Republic Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen.
North America 157. 158. Canada United States of America.
South-West Pacific 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. 168. 169. Australia Cook Islands Fiji Kiribati Micronesia, Federated States of New Zealand Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Vanuatu.
Contact points.
CODEX CONTACT POINTS27.
Directorate of Food Quality and Inspection Documentation Centre Ministry of Agriculture and Food Skenderbe sq Tirana Fax: +355 42 279244 Ministre de l'Economie Direction gnrale de la concurrence et des prix Direction de la qualit et de la consommation Palais du Gouvernement Alger Gabinete de Segurana Alimentar Ministerio da Agricultura e do Desenvolvimento Rural C.P. 527 Luanda Fax: +244 2 320553 +244 2321943 Director Antigua and Barbuda Bureau of Standards (ABBS) P.O. Box 1550, Redcliff Street St. John's, Antigua Phone: +854 462 1625 Fax: +854 462 1532 Email: abbs@candw.ag.
Antigua and Barbuda.
This list is subject to frequent changes. Contact Points of new Members are notified by Circular Letter. Revised lists are circulated at regular intervals and an up-dated list is maintained on the Codex Internet pages on the World-Wide Web at the following address: http://www.codexalimentarius.net.
Dr Alfredo Nader Coordinador de la Subsecretario de Poltica Agropecuaria Secretara de Agricultura, Ganadera, Pesca y Alimentacin (SAGPYA) Paseo Coln 982, Primer Piso, Oficina 68 (1063) Buenos Aires Phone: +54 11 4349 2356 Fax: +54 11 4349 2161 Email: codex@sagpya.minproduccion.gov.ar Dr. A. Malkhassian Director, State Enterprise "Paren" Ministry of Food and Purchase 375023 Yerevan Gorvetca str. 4 Phone: +374 252 46 86 +374 252 46 87 Fax: +374 2 52 88 43 Telex: 243338 VOLT SU Manager, Codex Australia Product Safety and Integrity, Product Integrity, Animal and Plant Health Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601 Phone: +61 2 6272 5692 Fax: +61 2 6272 3103 Email: codex.contact@affa.gov.au ann.backhouse@affa.gov.au Dr Erhard Hbaus Division III/4 Nutrition and Quality Management Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management Stubenring 1 A-1010 Vienna Phone: +431 71100 6802 Fax: +431 71100 2959 Email: erhard.hoebaus@bmlfuw.gv.at.
Director of Fisheries Department of Fisheries East Bay Street PO Box N-3028 Nassau Phone: +1 242 393 1777 +1 242 393 1014 Fax: +1 242 393 0238 Dr. Rifa'at Abdul Hameed Director of Public Health P.O. Box 42 Manama Fax: +973 25 25 69 Director-General Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institution (BSTI) 116/A, Tejgaon Industrial Area Dhaka 8 Phone: +880 2 882 14 62 Fax: +880 2 913 15 81 Email: bsti@bangla.net Director Barbados National Standards Institution "Flodden", Culloden Road St. Michael Phone: +1 246 426 38 70 Fax: +1 246 436 14 95 Email: office@bnsi.com.bb Comit belge du Codex Alimentarius Ministre des Affaires trangres, du commerce extrieur et de la Coopration au dveloppement Direction gnrale des relations conomiques et bilaterales extrieures 1000 Bruxelles Rue des Petits Carmes, 15 Phone: +32 02 5018111 +32 2 5018299 Fax: +32 2 5018827 Email: Charles.Cremer@health.fgov.be.
The Director Belize Bureau of Standards Ministry of Trade and Industry Belize City 53 Regent Street, P.O. Box 1647 Phone: +501 2 72 314 Fax: +501 2 70 711 Secretariat de la Commission nationale du Codex Alimentarius Direction de l'Alimentation et de la Nutrition applique (DANA) Ministre du Dveloppement Rural B.P. No. 295, Porto Novo Phone: +229 21 26 70 Mr. Sonam Tobgay Agricultural Marketing Section Ministry of Agriculture Thimpu Phone: +975 2 324898 +975 2 322834 Fax: +975 2 323153 Email: s_tobgay@moa.gov.bt sonamtobler@hotmail.com Direccin Ejecutiva Instituto Boliviano de Normalizacin y Calidad (IBNORCA) Calle Ricardo Muja N 665 - Sopocachi Casilla: La Paz - Bolivia 5034 Phone: +591 2 241 8236 +591 2 241 9038 Fax: +591 2 241 8262 Email: info@ibnorca.org The Head, National Food Control Laboratory Ministry of Health Private Bag 00269 Gaborone Phone: +267 374351 +267 374357 Fax: +267 374 354 Email: nfcbgabs@global.bw.
Brazilian Codex Contact Point Diviso de Agricultura e Produtos de Base Ministrio das Relaes Exteriores Esplanada dos Ministrios Bl. H Anexo I Sala 531 Braslia-DF CEP: 70 170-900 Phone: +55 61 411 6373 +55 61 411 6369 Fax: +55 61 226 3255 Email: mvieira@mre.gov.br Dr. Mohamad Y. Bin Haji Mohiddin Deputy Director of Agriculture Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Industry and Primary Resources Bandar Seri Begawan 2059 Fax: +673 2 382226 +673 2381639 Monsieur le Chef de la Section de la Commission du Codex Alimentarius Union nationale agro-industrielle 55, boul. Hristo Botev 1000 Sofia Phone: +359 2 8531 Ext.617 Fax: +359 2 800 655 Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Hydraulique et des Ressources Halieutiques/ Direction Gnrale des Prvisions et des Statistiques Agricoles (DGPSA) 03 BP 7010 Ouagadougou 03 Phone: +226 32 45 79 +226 32 45 80 Fax: +226 32 45 86 Email: agristat@fasonet.bf Bureau Burundais de normalisation et contrle de la qualit "BBN" B.P. 3535 Bujumbura Phone: +257 2 22 1815 +257 222 1577 Email: bbn@speednet.bi.
Brunei Darussalam.
Burkina Faso.
Mr. Lim Thearith Assistant Quality Control Service KAMCONTROL, 50E/144 Street Phnom-Penh Phone: +855 2 3485 Fax: +855 2 3426166 Ministre du dveloppement industriel et commercial Direction du dveloppement industriel Cellule de la normalisation et de la qualit Yaound Phone: +237 23 26 37 Fax: +237 22 27 04 Telex: 8638 KN Mr. Ron B. Burke, Director Bureau of Food Regulatory, International and Interagency Affairs Food Directorate, Health Products and Food Branch Health Canada Room 2395, Building No. 7 Tunney's Pasture (0702C1) Ottawa, Ontario K1A OL2 Phone: +1 613 957 1828 +1 613 957 1749 Fax: +1 613 941 3537 Email: codex_canada@hc-sc.gc.ca Gabinete de Estudos e Planeamento Ministerio de Pescas, de Agricultura y Animation Rurale Caixa Postal 115 Cidade de Praia Fax: +238 64054 Ministre des Eaux, des Forts, de la Chasse, de la Pche, charg de l'Environnement Ministre des Eaux, des Forts, de la Chasse, de la Pche, charg de l'Environnement Bangui.
Central African Republic.
Direction du gnie sanitaire et de l'assainissement Sous- direction de l'assainissement B.P. 440 N'Djamena Fax: +235 51 51 85 Ministerio de Salud Divisin de Salud Ambiental Estado 360 8o Piso, Oficina 801 Santiago Phone: +56 2 664 1240 +56 2 664 1244 Fax: +56 2 639 7110 Email: jcornejo@netline.cl Mr. Zhou Kaizhong Deputy Director-General Department of Market and Economic Information Ministry of Agriculture 11 Nongzhanguan Nanli Beijing, 100026 Phone: +86 10 64193150 +86 10 64193156 Fax: +86 10 64192468 Email: Zhoukzh@agri.gov.cn Ara de Alimentos Grupo Promocin y Prevencin Ministerio de la Proteccin Social Carrera 13, No. 32-76, Piso 14 Santaf de Bogot D.C. Phone: +57 1 3365066 Fax: +57 1 3360182 Email: bolarte@minproteccionsocial.gov.co Point de Contact: Codex Alimentarius Ministre du Dveloppement Industriel, des Petites et Moyennes Enreprises et de l'Artinisat B.P. 15.493 Brazzaville Phone: +242 81 41 57 Email: mdipmea@yahoo.fr.
Congo, Republic of.
Cook Islands Costa Rica.
No Contact Point notified Comit Nacional del Codex Alimentarius Oficina Nacional de Normas y Unidades de Medida Ministerio de Economia, Industria y Comercio A.P. 1736 2050 San Jos Phone: +506 283 5133 Fax: +506 222 2305 +506 283 5133 Telex: 2414 MEC Dr Hlne Coulibaly Directrice de l'alimentation et de la qualit Ministre de l'agriculture et des ressources animales B.P. V 84 Abidjan Phone: +225 2021 8972 Fax: +225 20 21 90 71 Email: daq@aviso.ci State Office for Standardization and Metrology National Contact Point - Codex Alimentarius Commission Ms. Tea Havranek Ulica grada Vukovara 78 10000 Zagreb Phone: +385 1 610 6005 Fax: +385 1 610 9320 Email: ured.ravnatelja@dznm.hr Sra. Directora, Direccin de Relaciones Internacionales Oficina Nacional de Normalizacin Calle E No. 261 entre 11 y 13 Vedado - La Habana 10400 Phone: +53 7 8300022 +53 7 8300835 Fax: +53 7 338048 Email: nc@ncnorma.cu.
Cte d'Ivoire.
Dr. Ioannis G. Karis Director, Cyprus Organization for Standards and Control of Quality Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism 1421 Nicosia Phone: +357 2 867 190 Fax: +357 2 37 51 20 Email: mcicys@cytanet.com.cy Ministerstvo zemedelstv Cesk republiky Odbor potravinrsk vroby Czech Codex Alimentarius Committee Tesnov 17 117 05 Praha 1 Phone: +420 2 2181 2795 + 420 2 2181 1111 Fax: +420 2 2231 4117 Email: pribylova@mze.cz Telex: 121041 Director Foodstuffs Institute P.O. Box 901 Pyongyang. 1re Direction des tudes et de la politique agricole Ministre de l'agriculture et du dveloppement rural B.P. 8722, Kinshasa 1 Phone: +243 12 31126 Telex: 21382 DR KIN ZR Danish Codex Contact Point Danish Veterinary and Food Administration Mrkhj Bygade 19 DK-2860 Sborg Phone: + 45 33 95 60 00 + 45 33 95 62 33 Fax: +45 33 95 62 99 Email: codex@fdir.dk jk@fdir.dk.
Czech Republic.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Director Dominica Bureau of Standards# 1st Floor, 28 Kennedy Avenue P.O. Box 1015 Roseau Phone: +767 448 1685 Fax: +767 449 9217 Email: standards@cwdom.dm Secretaria de Estado de Salud Publica y Asistencia Social (SESPAS). Av. Tirandentes, Esquina San Cristobal, Ensanche La Fe, Santo Domingo Phone: +1 809 565-6344 Fax: +1 809 541-0382 Email: rodriguezcodex@hotmail.com rosaacespedes@hotmail.com Sr. Director General Instituto Ecuatoriano de Normalizacin Calle Baquerizo Moreno E8-29 y Diego de Almagro (casilla: 17-01-3999) Quito Phone: +593 2 2501885 +593 2 2501887 Fax: +593 2 2567815 Email: inenfu@andinanet.net The President Egyptian Organization for Standardization (EOS) 2 Latin America Street Garden City, Cairo Phone: +20 2 354 9720 Fax: +20 2 354 8817 Email: moi@idsc.net.eg Telex: 932 96 eas un.
Dominican Republic.
El Salvador.
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologa (CONACYT) Colonia Medica Pasaje Dr. Guillermo Rodrguez Pacas y Ave. Dr. Emilio Alvarez No. 51 San Salvador Phone: + 503 226 2800 Fax: +503 225 6255 Email: crochoa@conacyt.gob.sv evanegas@conacyt.gob.sv Jefe Nacional de Estadsticas Agropecuarias Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadera, Pesca y Desarrollo Rural Malabo Fax: +240 9 3178 Dr. Akberom Tedla Head, Eritrean Standards Institution P.O. Box 245 Asmara Phone: +291 1 115624 +291 1 120328 Fax: +291 1 120245 Email: Akberom@ecl.doe.gov.er Dr. Toivo Novandi Head of Department, Veterinary and Food Department, Ministry of Agriculture 39/41 Lai str. EE 0100 Tallinn Phone: +372 6 256 212 Fax: +372 6 256 210.
Equatorial Guinea.
Mr Gashaw Workneh National Codex Officer Quality and Standards Authority of Ethiopia (QSAE) P.O. Box 2310 Addis Ababa Phone: +251 1 460525 +251 1 460111 Fax: +251 1 460880 +251 1 460881 Email: qsae@telecom.net.et The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Sugar and Land Resettlement, Private Mail Bag, Raiwaqa, Suva Phone: +679 3384233 Fax: +679 3385234 Ministry of Trade and Industry Advisory Committee on Foodstuffs General Secretary PO Box 32 FIN-00023 Government Phone: +358 9 1606 3654 Fax: +358 9 1606 2670 Email: anne.haikonen@ktm.fi Comit interministriel pour les questions de coopration conomique europenne Secrtariat gnral (SGCI) Carr Austerlitz 2, boulevard Diderot 75572 PARIS cedex 12 Phone: +33 1 44 87 16 03 Fax: +33 1 44 87 16 04 Email: sgci-codex-fr@sgci.finances.gouv.fr pascal.audebert@sgci.gouv.fr.
Commission nationale Gabonaise de la FAO Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'levage et du dveloppement rural B.P. 511 Libreville Phone: +241 763835 Fax: +241 728 275 The Director of Agriculture Department of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture Central Bank Building Buckle Street Banjul Fax: +220 228998 +220 227994 H.E. Bakur Guloa Minister of Agriculture and Food 41 Kostava Str. 380023 Tbilisi Bundesministerium fr Verbraucherschutz, Ernhrung und Landwirtschaft, Postfach 14 02 70 53107 Bonn Phone: +49 228 529 4655 Fax: +49 228 529 4842 Email: Martina.DeGrave@BMVEL.Bund.de The Director Ghana Standards Board P.O. Box M-245 Accra Phone: +233 21 500 065 Fax: +233 21 500 092 Email: gsbnep@ghana.com.
Directorate of Processing, Standardization and Quality Control of AgriFood Products of Plant Origin Ministry of Agriculture 2 Acharnon St. 101 76 Athens Phone: +30 1 0212 4319 Fax: +30 1 0523 8337 Email: ax2u049@minagric.gr Telex: 221701YGDP GR Director Grenada Bureau of Standards P.O. Box 2036 St. George's Grenada Phone: + 1 473 440 6783 +1 473 440 5886 Fax: +1 473 440 5554 Email: gdbs@caribsurf.com Jefe Area Inocuidad de los Alimentos no Procesados Unidad de Normas y Regulaciones Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadera y Alimentacin 7. Avenida No. 12-90 Zona 13, Guatemala. Phone: +502 475 3058 +502 475 3074 Fax: +502 475 3068 Email: codexguatemala@unr.gob.gt Correo@unr.gob.gt M. le Directeur Institut National de la Normalisation et de la Mtrologie B.P. 1639 Conakry Phone: +224 41 28 16 +224 41 35 03 Fax: +224 41 39 90.
Director Guyana National Bureau of Standards P.O. Box 10926 Georgetown Phone: +592 2 77841 +592 2 77890 Fax: +592 2 77890 Email: gnbs@sdnp.org.gy Cable: GUYSTAN M. Raymond Tardieu Direction normalisation et contrle de la qualit Ministre du commerce 8, rue Lgitime, Champ de Mars Port-au-Prince Dra Sonia Benitez Punto de Contacto del Codex en Honduras Direccin General de Regulacin y Desarrollo Institucional Secretaria de Salud c/o Representacin FAO en Honduras A.P. 1808 Tegucigalpa Phone: +504 2369346 +504 2367321 Fax: +504 2367124 Email: FAO-HND@field.fao.org Dr. Mria Vradi Scientific Deputy Director Central Food Research Institute (KEKI) P.O. Box 393 (Herrman Ott t 15) H-1536 Budapest 9 Phone: +36 1 355 8982 Fax: +36 1 355 9853 +36 1 355 8928 Email: m.varadi@mail.cfri.hu.
Mr. Thodur sgeirsson Director of Fisheries Directorate of Fisheries Inglfsstrti 1 101 Reykjavk Phone: +354 569 7900 Fax: +354 569 7991 Email: thordur@fiskistofa.is Dr. S.R. Gupta Assistant Director General (PFA) and Liaison Officer, National Codex Committee Directorate General of Health Services Nirman Bhavan New Delhi 110 011 Phone: +91 11 3012290 Fax: +91 11 3012290 Email: Codex-India@nb.nic.in Telex: 31 66119 DGHS IN Director General BSN - Badan Standardisasi Nasional (National Standardization Agency) Manggala Wanabakti Block IV, 4th floor Jl. Jnd. Gatot Subroto, Senayan Jakarta 10270 Phone: +62 21 574 7043 +62 21 574 7044 Fax: +62 21 574 7045 Email: bsn@bsn.or.id sps-2@bsn.or.id Institute of Standards and Industrial Research of Iran Ministry of Industries P.O. Box 15875-4618 Teheran Phone: +98 261 2803870 Fax: +98 261 2803870 Email: Codex-Office@Isiri.org Telex: 215442 STAN IR.
Iran (Islamic Republic of).
Central Organization for Standardization and Quality Control Ministry of Planning P.O. Box 13032 Baghdad  Jadria Phone: +964 1 7765180 +964 1 7765181 Fax: +964 1 7765781 Telex: 213505 COSQC IK Mr.Richard Howell Food and Research Group Department of Agriculture and Food 7C Kildare Street Dublin 2 Phone: +353 1 607 2572 Fax: +353 1 661 62 63 Email: Richard.Howell@agriculture.gov.ie Mr. Lazar VOLMAN Citrus Products Board 29 Karlibach St. 67132 Tel Aviv Phone: +972 3 561 2323 Fax: +972 3 561 2327 Email: citruspr@zahav.net.il Dott.ssa B. Lo Turco Segreteria, Comitato Nazionale Italiano per il Codex Alimentarius Ministero delle Politiche Agricole e Forestali - D.G. delle Politiche Comunitarie e Internazionali Via XX Settembre 20 00187 Rome Phone: +39 06 4880273 +39 06 46655016 Fax: +39 06 4880273 Email: blturco@tiscalinet.it.
Bureau of Standards 6 Winchester Road P.O. Box 113 Kingston 10 Phone: +876 926 3140 6 +876 968 2063 71 Fax: +876 929 4736 Email: arobins@toj.com nfo@jbs.org.jm Telex: 2291 STANBUR JA Yoshihiro Yamashita Policy Division Science and Technology Policy Bureau Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology 3-2-2 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku Tokyo 100-8959 Phone: +81 3 5253 4111 Fax: +81 3 5253 4010 Email: codex@mext.go.jp National Committee for Codex Alimentarius Directorate of Standards Ministry of Industry and Trade P.O. Box 2019 Amman Phone: +962 6 568 01 39 +962 6 568 10 99 Email: jism@nic.net.jo Dr B.T. Tleubekor Chief, Department of Sanitary-Hygiene Surveillance Moskovskaya str 66 473000 Astana Phone: +8 317 231 7811 Fax: +8 317 231 7807.
Margaret C. Rotich (Mrs.) Kenya Bureau of Standards (KEBS) Kapiti Road, Off Mombasa Road P. O. Box 54974 - 00200, Nairobi Phone: +254 2 502211 +254 2 503293 Fax: +254 2 602350 +254 2 609660 Email: info@kebs.org No Contact Point notified Mr. Yousef Al-Babar Vice General Director for Standards & Industrial Services Affairs Public Authority for Industry P.O. Box 4690 Safat P.Cod 13047 Phone: +965 2411062 +965 2465103 Fax: +965 2451141 +965 2436638 Telex: 44205 Cable: SIDEB Kuwait Department of State Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance Ministry of Health Frunze str. 353 720033 Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan Fax: +996 312 66 05 38 Email: dgsm@elcat.kg H.E. Ponemek Daraloy Minister Ministry of Health (Through: FAO Representative B.P. 1640) Vientiane.
Kiribati Kuwait.
Lao People's Democratic Republic.
Mr. Ieva Gange Senior Officer Veterinary and Food Department Ministry of Agriculture Republikas laukums 2 Riga, LV-1981 Phone: +371 7027200 Fax: +371 7027205 Email: ievag@zm.gov.lv Mr. Antoine Sema'an Director General, LIBNOR - Lebanese Standards Institution Sin El Fil  Gedco 3 center Block B, 10th floor P.O. Box 55120 Beirut Phone: +961 1 485927 +961 1 485928 Fax: +961 1 485929 Email: libnor@cnrs.edu.lb Standards and Quality Assurance Section Ministry of Industry, Trade and Marketing P.O. Box 747 Maseru Mr. Joseph M. Coleman Director of Standards Ministry of Commerce & Industry P.O. Box 10-9041 1000 Monrovia Director Office of International Cooperation, Secretariat for Agricultural Reclamation and Land Development c/o UNDP Office - P.O. Box 358 Tripoli Fax: +218 21 603449.
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Assoc.Prof. J. Algis Abaravicius Hygiene Doctor Lithuanian National Nutrition Center Ministry of Health Kalvariju 153 LT-2600 Vilnius Phone: +370 2 778919 +370 85 85894 Fax: +370 2 778713 Email: RMC@RMC.LT algis.abaravicius@mf.vu.lt M. Franois Arendt Ingnieur-chef de Division Laboratoire national de sant 1 A rue Auguste Lumire Luxembourg Direction de la Qualit et de la Mtrologie Lgale Ministre du Commerce B.P. 1316 Antananarivo  101 Mr Austin S Khulumula Director-General Malawi Bureau of Standards P O Box 946 Blantyre Phone: +265 1 670 488 Fax: +265 1 670 756 Email: mbs@malawi.net askhulumula@malawi.net.
Chief Secretariat Food Quality Control Division Department of Public Health Ministry of Health Malaysia Block B, 3rd Floor Kompleks Pejabat-Pejabat Kesihatan Jalan Cenderasari, 50590 Kuala Lumpur Phone: +60 3 26946601 Fax: +60 3 26946517 Email: ccp-malaysia@dph.gov.my ccp-malaysia@hotmail.com No Contact Point notified Mr. John Attard Kingswell Manager Health Inspector Department of Public Health 37/39, Rue d'Argens, Msida Phone: +356 21332225 +356 21337333 Fax: +356 21344767 Email: Mhi@gov.mt Centre National d'Hygine B.P. 695 Nouakchott Phone: +222 5253 134 +222 5253 175 Fax: +222 5253 134 The Chief Agricultural Officer Agricultural Services Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Natural Resources NFP Building, Maillard Street Port Louis Fax: +230 212 4427.
Direccin General de Normas (DGN) Secretara de Economa Ave. Puente de Tecamachalco No.6 Lomas de Tecamachalco, Seccin Fuentes, Naucalpan de Jurez, Estado de Mxico. 53950, Mxico Phone: +52 55 5729 9480 +52 55 5729 9300 Fax: +52 55 5729 9480 +52 55 5519 9715 Email: codexmex@economia.gob.mex jorgez@economia.gob.mx Dr. Eliuel K. Pretrick Secretary, FSM Department of Health, Education and Social Affairs P.O. Box PS-70 Palikir, Pohnpei State FM 96941 Phone: +691 320 2619 +691 320 2643 Fax: +691 320 5263 Email: FSMEnvironment@mail.fm The Director National Centre for Hygiene, Epidemiology and Microbiology Ministry of Health Central Post - PO Box 596 Ulaanbaatar Fax: +976 132 1278 Division de la Rpression des Fraudes Ministre de l'agriculture et de la mise en valeur agricole 25, Avenue des Alaouiyines Rabat Fax: +212 37 763378.
Micronesia, Federated States of.
Codex Contact Point in Mozambique Departamento de Higiene Ambiental Attn. Mr. Evaristo Baquete, Chefe do Departamento Ministerio da Sade P.O. Box 264 Maputo Director# Food and Drug Administration Department of Health 35, Min Kyaung Road Yangon Dagon Township Phone: +95 1 245331 Dr V. Shivute The Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development Private Bag 13184 Windhoek Phone: +264 61 208 7649 Fax: +264 61 22 1733 Email: Stanleye@mawrd.gov.na Chief Food Research Officer Central Food Research Laboratory Babar Mahal Kathmandu Phone: +977 1 2 14824 +977 12 12781 Ms. Elfriede E.E. Adriaansz Executive Officer for Codex Alimentarius Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries Department of Food and Veterinary Affairs Room 4301 P.O.Box 20401 2500 EK The Hague Phone: +31 70 378 4104 Fax: +31 70 378 6141 Email: info@codexalimentarius.nl.
Netherlands.
New Zealand.
S. Rajasekar Codex Coordinator and Contact Point for New Zealand New Zealand Food Safety Authority 68-86 Jervois Quay P O Box 2835 Wellington Phone: +64 4 463 2576 Fax: +64 4 463 2583 Email: rajasekars@nzfsa.govt.nz Punto de Contacto del Codex Direccin de Tecnologa, Normalizacin y Metrologa (DTNM) Ministerio de Fomento Industria y Comercio (MIFIC) Kilmetro 6 Carretera Managua-Masaya Phone: +505 267 0161 Fax: +505 267 2019 Email: codex@mific.gob.ni dtnm@mific.gob.ni Division Nutrition Direction Sant Familial Ministre de la Sant Publique B.P. 623 Niamey Phone: +227 72 36 00 Fax: +227 72 24 24 Director General of Standards Standards Organisation of Nigeria Federal Secretariat Phase 1, 9th fl. P.M.B. No. 2102 (Yaba) Ikoyi, Lagos Phone: +234 1 2696177 Fax: +234 1 2696178 Email: son@sononline-ng.org.
(Ms) Dr. Berit Wilsher Norwegian Food Control Authority Postboks 8187 Dep. 0034 Oslo 1 Phone: +47 2224 6650 Fax: +47 2224 6699 Email: berit.wilsher@snt.no Director General of Health Affairs Directorate General of Health Affairs Ministry of Health P.O. Box 393 - Darseit 113 Muscat Phone: +968 602177 Fax: +968 696099 Telex: 5465 SIHA ON The Director-General for Health Ministry of Health, Social Welfare and Population Planning Government of Pakistan Secretariat Block C Islamabad Phone: +92 51 82 09 30 Cable: SEHAT ISLAMABAD Punto de Contacto: Ministerio de Comercio e Industrias Direccin General de Normas y Tecnologa Industrial Directora: Elvia V. de Carles Edificio Plaza Edison, 3er Piso Panam Phone: +507 360 0716 Fax: +507 360 0721 Dr. Ian I. Onaga Program Manager Technical and Field Services Branch Dept. of Agriculture and Livestock P.O. Box 2141, Boroko NCD Phone: +675 321 7005 Fax: +675 321 4364 167.
Papua New Guinea.
Dra. Lilian Martinez de Alonso Director General Instituto Nacional de Tecnologa y Normalizacin Avda. General Artigas y General Roa - C.C. 967 Asuncin Phone: +595 21 290 160 +595 21 290 266 Fax: +595 21 290 873 Email: codex@intn.gov.py Dr. Alberto Documet Perea Director Ejecutivo de Higiene Alimentaria y Zoonosis Direccin General de Salud Ambiental Ministerio de Salud Calle Las Amapolas N 350 Lince, Lima 14 Phone: +51 1 4428353 +51 1 4428356 Fax: +51 1 4428353 Email: codex@digesa.sld.pe OIC-Director Gilberto F. Layese Bureau of Agriculture and Fisheries Product Standards (BAFPS) Department of Agriculture Elliptical Road, Diliman Quezon City 1104 Phone: +63 2 920 6131 +63 2 920 6132 Fax: +63 2 920 6134 Agricultural and Food Quality Inspection 30 Wsplna Street 00-930 Warsaw Phone: +48 22 621 6421 Fax: +48 22 621 48 58 +48 22 629 48 16 Email: kodeks@ijhar-s.gov.pl.
Philippines.
Dr. Carlos Alberto M. Andrade Fontes Director, Gabinete de Planeamento e Poltica AgroAlimentar Ministerio da Agricultura, do Desenvolvimento Rural e das Pescas Rua Padre Antnio Vieira 1-7o 1099-073 Lisboa Phone: +351 21 3819320 Fax: +351 21 3876635 Email: dd@gppaa.min-agricultura.pt Under-Secretary Ministry of Public Health P.O. Box 3050 Doha Phone: +974 29 20 00 Fax: +974 43 30 19 Director (for Codex) Bilateral Cooperation Division Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry #1, Joongang, Kwachon, Kyonggi 427-719 Republic of Korea Phone: +82 2 500 2656 Fax: +82 2 507 2095 Email: maf.bcd@maf.go.kr National Centre for Applied and Scientific Preventive Medicine Ministry of Health 67a, Gh. Asaki street, of. 401 MD 2028, Chisinau Phone: +373 2 735822 +373 2 735813 Fax: +373 2 729725 Email: codex@mednet.md nopopol@mednet.md.
Republic of Korea.
Republic of Moldova.
Romanian Codex Contact Point Food Industry Division Ministry of Agriculture and Food Bdul. Carol I, No 24, Sector 3 70033 Bucarest Phone: +401 3112278 +401 3120274 Fax: +401 3112278 +401 3120274 Institute of Nutrition of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences Attention: Drs V.A.Tutelian and A.K. Baturin Ust'Insky Pr., 2/14 109240 Moskva Phone: +7 095 925 1140 Fax: +7 095 230 2812 Telex: 411407 Division-Normalisation et Contrle de la Qualit Ministre du Commerce et de la Consommation B.P. 476 Kigali Phone: +250 73875 +250 73237 Fax: +250 72984 Telex: 502 MINAFFET RW Dr. Milton Whittaker Director, Bureau of Standards Ministry of Trade Government of St. Kitts and Nevis Basseterre, SAINT KITTS The Director Saint Lucia Bureau of Standards (SLBS) Block B, 4th Floor, Heraldine Rock Bldg John Compton Highway LC-Castries Phone: +1 758 453 0049 +1 758 468 4235 Fax: +1 758 452 3561 Email: slbs@candw.lc.
Russian Federation.
Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Saint Lucia.
Assistant CEO Fair Trading & Standards Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour (MCIL) Apia Phone: +685 20471 +685 24084 Fax: +685 21646 Email: Iulia.Petelo@tci.gov.ws Attention: Public Relations Department (International Relations) Saudi Arabian Standards Organization (SASO) P.O. Box 3437 Riyadh 11471 Phone: +966 1 452 0224 +966 1 452 0166 Fax: +966 1 452 0167 Telex: SASO SJ 401610 Comit national du Codex Service de l'alimentation et de la nutrition applique au Sngal (SANAS) Ministre de la Sant Direction de la Sant BP 10604, Dakar Phone: +221 824 47 53 Fax: +221 824 75 49 Director, Federal Institution for Standardization (SZS) Savezno Ministarstvo Za Razvoj Nauku I Zivotnu Sredinu, Kneza Milosa 20 11000 Beograd Phone: +381 11 361 31 50 Fax: +381 11361 73 41 Email: jus@szs.sv.gov.yu.
Saudi Arabia.
Serbia and Montenegro.
Director Seychelles Bureau of Standards P.O. Box 953 Victoria (Mah) Phone: +248 38 04 00 Fax: +248 37 51 51 Email: sbsorg@seychelles.net The Director, Food Standards Department Sierra Leone Standards Bureau S.L.P.M.B Headquarters Building C.T. Box 11, Clinetown Freetown Phone: +232 22 228 374 Fax: +232 22 224 437 Email: slsb@sierratel.sl kaliserra@hotmail.com Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority 5 Maxwell Road #18-00 Tower Block, MND Complex Singapore 069110 Phone: +65 6325 5480 +65 6325 8582 Fax: +65 6324 4563 Email: SEAH_Huay_Leng@ava.gov.sg CHU_Sin-I@ava.gov.sg Secretariat of the Slovak Food Codex Committee Food Research Institute 824 75 Bratislava 26 P.O.Box 25 Priemyselna 4 Phone: +42 12 55574622 Fax: +42 12 55571417 Email: codex@vup.sk.
Sierra Leone.
Slovak Republic.
Dr. Marusa Adamic Hygiene Specialist Institute for Public Health and Social Welfare Trubarjeva 2 61000 Ljubjana Phone: +386 61 32 3245 Fax: +386 61 32 39 55 Mr. David Ho'ota Ministry of Health and Medical Services P.O. Box 349 Honiara Phone: +677 38871 Fax: +677 25513 Email: Dth8@hotmail.com Directorate: Food Control Department of Health Private Bag X828 0001Pretoria Phone: +27 12 312 0167 +27 12 312 0185 Fax: +27 12 326 4374 Email: carolv@health.gov.za Secretara de la Comisin Inter-ministerial para la Ordenacin Alimentaria (CIOA) Subdireccin General de Higiene de los Alimentos Direccin General de Salud Pblica Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo Paseo del Prado 18 - 20 28071 Madrid Phone: +34 91 596 13 46 +34 91 596 14 40 Fax: +34 91 596 44 87 +34 91 596 15 47 Email: fmittelbrunn@msc.es Director, (Environment and Occupational Health) Ministry of Health - Room 149 385 Deans Road Colombo 10 Phone: +94 1 432050 +94 1 437884 Fax: +94 1 440399.
Solomon Islands.
South Africa.
Director-General Sudanese Standards and Metrology Organization (SSMO) P.O. Box 194 Khartoum Phone: +249 11 775247 Fax: +249 11 776359 Email: ssmo@sudanmail.net Humbert W. Belliot Head - Juridical Affairs and Foreign Relations Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries Letitia Vriesdelaan - P.O.Box 1807 Paramaribo Phone: +597 42 0061 Fax: +597 47 0301 The Principal Secretary Att: Director of Health Services Ministry of Health P.O. Box 5 Mbabane Phone: +268 42431 Fax: +268 42092 Telex: 2393 MH Swedish Codex Contact Point National Food Administration Box 622 S-751 26 Uppsala Phone: +46 18 17 55 00 Fax: +46 18 10 58 48 Email: evlo@slv.se Ms Awilo OCHIENG PERNET Codex Contact Point Swiss Federal Office of Public Health CH-3003 Bern Phone: +41 31 322 95 72 +41 31 322 95 89 Fax: +41 31 322 95 74 Email: awilo.ochieng@bag.admin.ch.
Switzerland.
Syrian Arab Republic.
Syrian Arab Organization for Standardization and Metrology (SASMO) P.O. Box 11836 Damascus Phone: +963 11 512 8213 Fax: +963 11 512 8214 Email: sasmo@net.sy Director Office of Commodity and System Standards National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food Standards Fl 22, LPN Tower 1 333 Vipavadee-Rangsit Rd Jatujak, Bangkok 10900 Phone: +66 2 6188861 Fax: +66 2 6188863 Email: codex@acfs.go.th Prim. Blagoja Aleksoski, MD Director Republic Institute for Health Protection "50 Divizija" 6 1000 Skopje Phone: + 389 2 147 051 Fax: + 389 2 223 354 Email: codexalimentarius@mail.net.mk blagoja_al@yahoo.com M. le Charg de liaison du Codex Alimentarius Division Nutrition  l'I.T.R.A BP 1163, Lom Phone: + 228 225 15 59 Fax: +228 225 30 96 Mr. Haniteli Faanunu Director, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry P.O. Box 14 Nuku'alofa Phone: +676 23 402 Fax: +676 24 271.
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Trinidad and Tobago.
The Chief Chemist and Director of Food and Drugs Chemistry Food and Drugs Division Ministry of Health and Environment 35-37 Sackville Street Port-of-Spain M. Ali Ben Gad Prsident Directeur Gnral Institut national de la normalisation et de la proprit industrielle (INNORPI) B.P. 23 (Cit El Khadhra par rue A. Savary) 1012 Tunis-Belvedere Phone: +216 1 785 922 Fax: +216 1 781 563 General Directorate of Protection and Control Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Akay Cad. No 3 Bakanhklar Ankara Phone: +90 312 417 41 76 Fax: +90 312 418 65 23 Dr. Terry Kahuma Executive Director Uganda National Bureau of Standards P.O. Box 6329 Kampala Phone: +256 41 222367 +256 41 505995 Fax: +256 41 286123 Email: unbs@afsat.com Authority for Standardization and Metrology P.O. Box 2166 Abu Dhabi Phone: +971 267 10888 Fax: +917 267 1099 Email: esma@uae.gov.ae.
United Arab Emirates.
United Kingdom.
Mrs Tutu Aluko Food Standards Agency Room 615 C Aviation House 125 Kingsway London WC2B 6NH Phone: +44 20 7276 8164 Fax: +44 207276 8193 Email: tutu.aluko@foodstandards.gsi.gov.uk The Tanzania Bureau of Standards P.O. Box 9524 Dar-es-Salaam Phone: +255 22 2450298 +255 22 2450206 Fax: +255 22 2450959 Email: tbsinfo@uccmail.co.tz Telex: 41667 TBS TZ U.S. Codex Office Room 4861 South Building Food Safety and Inspection Service US Department of Agriculture 1400 Independence Ave. SW Washington D.C. 20250 Phone: +1 202 205 7760 +1 202 720 2057 Fax: +1 202 720 3157 Email: uscodex@fsis.usda.gov ed.scarbrough@fsis.usda.gov Ing. Ruperto E. Long Presidente, Laboratorio Tecnolgico del Uruguay (LATU) Av. Italia 6201 (C.P. 11500) Montevideo Phone: +598 2 6013730 Fax: +598 2 6042960 Email: jrodrig@latu.org.uy.
United Republic of Tanzania.
United States of America.
Mr. Benuel Tarilongi Principal Plant Protection Officer Vanuatu Quarantine Inspection Service Department of Agriculture and Horticulture Private Mail Bag 040 Port-Vila Phone: +678 23130 Fax: +678 24653 Email: vqisvila@vanuatu.com.vu Sr. Jefe, Seccin de Registro de Alimentos, Ministerio de Sanidad y Asistencia Social Centro Simn Bolivar, Edif. Sur 2 Caracas Mr.Nguyen Huu Thien Director-General, Directorate for Standards and Quality 70 Tran Hung Dao Str. Hanoi Phone: +84 4 266220 Fax: +84 4 267418 General Director for Measurements Ministry of Economy, Supply and Trade Sana'a Secretary, Food and Drugs Control Ministry of Health P.O. Box 30205 Lusaka Fax: +260 1 22 34 35 The Government Analyst The Government Analyst's Laboratory P.O. Box CY 231 Causeway Harare Phone: +263 4 792026 Fax: +263 4 708527 Email: dnhari@gta.gov.zw.
Appendix: General decisions.
APPENDIX: GENERAL DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
STATEMENTS OF PRINCIPLE CONCERNING THE ROLE OF SCIENCE IN THE CODEX DECISION-MAKING PROCESS AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH OTHER FACTORS ARE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT28.
The food standards, guidelines and other recommendations of Codex Alimentarius shall be based on the principle of sound scientific analysis and evidence, involving a thorough review of all relevant information, in order that the standards assure the quality and safety of the food supply.
When elaborating and deciding upon food standards Codex Alimentarius will have regard, where appropriate, to other legitimate factors relevant for the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair practices in food trade.
In this regard it is noted that food labelling plays an important role in furthering both of these objectives.
When the situation arises that members of Codex agree on the necessary level of protection of public health but hold differing views about other considerations, members may abstain from acceptance of the relevant standard without necessarily preventing the decision by Codex. Criteria for the Consideration of the Other Factors Referred to in the Second Statement of Principle29 when health and safety matters are concerned, the Statements of Principle Concerning the Role of Science and the Statements of Principle Relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment should be followed; other legitimate factors relevant for health protection and fair trade practices may be identified in the risk management process, and risk managers should indicate how these factors affect the selection of risk management options and the development of standards, guidelines and related texts; consideration of other factors should not affect the scientific basis of risk analysis; in this process, the separation between risk assessment and risk.
Decision of the 21st Session of the Commission, 1995. Decision of the 24th Session of the Commission, 2001. 179.
management should be respected, in order to ensure the scientific integrity of the risk assessment; it should be recognized that some legitimate concerns of governments when establishing their national legislation are not generally applicable or relevant world-wide;30 only those other factors which can be accepted on a world-wide basis, or on a regional basis in the case of regional standards and related texts, should be taken into account in the framework of Codex; the consideration of specific other factors in the development of risk management recommendations of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and its subsidiary bodies should be clearly documented, including the rationale for their integration, on a case-by-case basis; the feasibility of risk management options due to the nature and particular constraints of the production or processing methods, transport and storage, especially in developing countries, may be considered; concerns related to economic interests and trade issues in general should be substantiated by quantifiable data; the integration of other legitimate factors in risk management should not create unjustified barriers to trade31; particular attention should be given to the impact on developing countries of the inclusion of such other factors.
Confusion should be avoided between justification of national measures under the SPS and TBT Agreements and their validity at the international level. According to the WTO principles, and taking into account the particular provisions of the SPS and TBT Agreements. 180.
STATEMENTS OF PRINCIPLE RELATING TO THE ROLE OF FOOD SAFETY RISK ASSESSMENT32.
Health and safety aspects of Codex decisions and recommendations should be based on a risk assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances.
Food safety risk assessment should be soundly based on science, should incorporate the four steps of the risk assessment process, and should be documented in a transparent manner.
There should be a functional separation of risk assessment and risk management, while recognizing that some interactions are essential for a pragmatic approach.
Decision of the 22nd Session of the Commission, 1997. 181.
MEASURES TO FACILITATE CONSENSUS33.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission, desiring that every effort should be made to reach agreement on the adoption or amendment of standards by consensus, recommends the following measures to facilitate consensus: Refraining from submitting proposals in the step process where the scientific basis is not well established on current data and, where necessary, carry out further studies in order to clarify controversial issues; Providing for thorough discussions and documentation of the issues at meetings of the committees concerned; Organizing informal meetings of the parties concerned where disagreements arise, provided that the objectives of any such meetings are clearly defined by the Committee concerned and that participation is open to all interest delegations and observers in order to preserve transparency; Redefining, where possible, the scope of the subject matter being considered for the elaboration of standards in order to cut out issues on which consensus could not be reached; Providing that matters are not progressed from step to step until all relevant concerns are taken into account and adequate compromises worked out; Emphasizing to Committees and their Chairpersons that matters should not be passed on to the Commission until such time as consensus has been achieved at the technical level; Facilitating the increased involvement and participation of developing countries. _____________________________.
Decision of the 26th Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2003.
Acceptance of Codex Standards, 3, 19, 20, 23, 24, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 76, 87, 110, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 181 Free distribution, 30, 32, 33, 36, 38 Full acceptance, 30, 32 Specified Deviations, 24, 27, 30, 31, 36 Withdrawal or amendment of acceptance, 33 Africa FAO/WHO Coordinating Committee, 89, 90, 132 Animal Feeding Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force, 51, 52, 90, 112, 131, 132 Asia FAO/WHO Coordinating Committee, 89, 90, 134.
Definitions Risk Analysis, 43 Definitions for the Purpose of Codex Alimentarius, 51.
Biotechnology Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods derived from, 90, 130, 131.
Economic Impact Statements, 45, 46, 48, 49, 62, 110, 182 Edible Ices Codex Committee on, 90, 126 Elaboration of Codex Standards and Related Texts, 15, 19, 24, 26, 27, 57, 60, 64, 74, 96, 98, 102 Europe FAO/WHO Coordinating Committee, 90, 135 Executive Committee of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, 4, 9, 10, 183.
Cereals, Pulses and Legumes Codex Committee on, 89, 127 Cocoa Products and Chocolate Codex Committee on, 121 Codex Alimentarius Commission, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 33, 34, 36, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 52, 53, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62,.
General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29, 36, 37, 39, 63, 75, 89, 98, 99, 110, 140.
Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems Codex Committee on, 89, 96, 118.
Latin America and the Caribbean FAO/WHO Coordinating Committee, 90, 136.
Meat Codex Committee on, 123, 124 Meat and Poultry Hygiene Codex Committee on, 124 Meat Hygiene Codex Committee on, 124 Member Nations, 13 Member Organization, 6, 7 Membership, 3, 6 Member Organizations, 6, 7 Methods of Analysis Uncertainty, 43, 45, 46, 49, 78, 79, 80, 84 Methods of Analysis and Sampling, 29, 39, 40, 76, 77, 87, 88, 89, 95, 96, 100, 101, 115, 116, 130 Analytical Terminology, 79 Classification of Methods of Analysis, 39, 40, 76, 77, 78, 100 Codex Committee on, 39, 40, 76, 77, 87, 88, 95, 100, 101, 102, 115 Milk and Milk Products Codex Committee on, 109, 129 FAO/WHO Committee of Government Experts on the Code of Principles Concerning, 109.
General Principles Codex Committee on, 36, 39, 110 184.
Natural Mineral Waters Codex Committee on, 90, 129 Near East FAO/WHO Coordinating Committee, 90, 137 Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses, 89, 96, 120, 148, 164, 168, 171, 172, 176 Codex Committee on, 120.
Observers, 3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 16, 57, 59, 60, 62, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 184 International Organizations, 13 Non-Governmental Organizations, 13, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139 Non-Member Nations, 12 Other legitimate factors, 182.
Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods, 21, 22, 32, 33, 53, 89, 116, 118 Codex Committee on, 118 Revision of Codex Standards, 20, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 34, 58, 73, 123 Risk Analysis Definitions, 42, 43, 54 Risk Assessment, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 54, 55, 113, 181, 183 Risk Communication, 43, 48, 49, 54 Risk Estimate, 45, 46 Risk Management, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 54, 55, 113, 181, 182, 183 Risk Profile, 46 Rules of Procedure, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 57, 62, 66, 73, 74, 109, 130.
Science Other legitimate factors, 181 Role of in Codex Decision-Making, 42, 53, 161, 181, 183 Soups and Broths Codex Committee on, 90, 126 Statutes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, 3, 10, 15, 16, 17, 57, 66, 74 Sugars Codex Committee on, 121.
Pesticide Residues, 21, 22, 27, 29, 32, 33, 37, 51, 52, 89, 94, 101, 116, 117, 118 Codex Committee on, 101, 116 Processed Fruits and Vegetables Codex Committee on, 90, 122, 140 Processed Meat and Poultry Products Codex Committee on, 91, 124, 140.
Quick Frozen Foods Joint FAO/ECE Group of Experts, 91, 140.
Task Forces Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental, 56, 57, 73, 74, 90, 130, 131, 132, 141.
Reference system for documents, 89 Regional Economic Integration Organizations, 6.
Uncertainty See Methods of Analysis, 43, 45, 46, 49, 78, 79, 80, 84.
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE), 91, 128, 129, 140.
Codex Committee on, 127.
Weights and Measures, 38, 94.
Vegetable Proteins.
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme.
Co dex Alimentarius Commission Executive Committee S e c re t a ria t.
General Subject Committees.
Commodity Committees.
ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Forces.
Regional Coordinating Committees.
General Principles (France).
Milk and Milk Products (New Zealand).
Fruit and Vegetable Juices (Brazil ).
Asia (Malaysia).
Food Additives and Contaminants (Netherlands).
Cocoa Products and Chocolate (Switzerland).
Foods Derived from Biotechnology (Japan).
Africa (Uganda).
Food Hygiene (USA).
Processed Fruits and Vegetables (USA).
Animal Feeding (Denmark).
Europe (Slovak Republic).
Food Labelling (Canada).
Meat and Poultry Hygiene (New Zealand).
Latin America and the Caribbean (Dominican Republic).
Methods of Analysis and Sampling (Hungary).
Fish and Fishery Products (Norway).
Near East (Egypt).
Pesticide Residues (Netherlands).
Fresh Fruit and Vegetables (Mexico).
North America and the Southwest Pacific (Canada).
Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (USA).
Fats and Oils (United Kingdom).
Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (Australia) Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses (Germany).
Sugars (United Kingdom) adjourned.
Cereals, Pulses and Legumes (USA) adjourned Vegetabl e Proteins (Canada) adjourned.
Natural Mineral Waters (Switzerland) adjourned.
