FAO Fisheries Report No. 731.
FIPL/R731 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: A CALL TO ACTION.
Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003.
Printed on ecological paper.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: A CALL TO ACTION Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-105101-1.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2004.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This is the final report of the FAO Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action, which was held at the Fiji Mocambo Hotel in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003. FAO. Report of the Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action. Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003. FAO Fisheries Report. No 731. Rome, FAO. 2004. 151p. ABSTRACT This document contains the report of, and the papers presented at, the FAO Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action which was held in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003. The goals of the Workshop were to facilitate a greater understanding of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries among all stakeholders involved in fisheries in the Pacific Islands; to foster steps towards the more effective implementation of the Code in the region; to encourage fishery policy revisions reflecting the objectives and general principles of the Code and to encourage an inclusive approach to management whereby stakeholders are involved in the development and review processes and the implementation of measures rather than an exclusive process where stakeholders are largely excluded from the processes. In the course of its deliberations, the Workshop addressed the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its framework; legal considerations and issues relating to the Code; responsible fisheries management; responsible fishing operations; responsible aquaculture and inland fisheries; responsible post-harvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. In addition, there was a role-playing exercise concerning making responsible decisions about fisheries. To enhance the participatory nature of the Workshop, five Working Groups were formed. They focused on fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture and inland fisheries development, post-harvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. Each Working Group developed conclusions and recommendations. The Workshop endorsed several national, regional and global follow-up actions. The Workshop was funded by the FAO FishCode Programme through Project GCP/INT/823/JPN (SIDS: Responsible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States) and the FAO Regular Programme.
Distribution: Participants FAO Fisheries Officers, Regional and Subregional Offices.
Page OPENING OF THE WORKSHOP INTRODUCTION TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES FRAMEWORK OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ISSUES RELATING TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBLE FISHING OPERATIONS RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ROLE-PLAYING: MAKING RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS ABOUT FISHERIES FORMATION OF THE WORKING GROUPS AND THEIR REPORTS ON CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS GENERAL OBSERVATIONS BY THE WORKSHOP FACILITATOR AND PROPOSED FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS CLOSURE OF THE WORKSHOP 1.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Agenda List of Participants Documentation presented Opening Statement by Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, Fisheries Department, FAO Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: An Analysis of 2002 Responses 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Underpinning Concepts, Goals and Principles 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Background, Content and Role Legal Considerations for the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and Related International Plans of Action The Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Article 8 ­ Fishing Operations Responsible Aquaculture in the Pacific Islands: The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its Application to the Pacific Islands Implementing Responsible Post-Harvest Practices in the Pacific Islands Integrating Fisheries into Coastal Management in Pacific Small Island Developing States Role-Playing: Making Responsible Decisions about Fisheries Composition of the Working Groups Discussion Guides 27 28 33 34 36 46 52 62.
OPENING OF THE WORKSHOP.
The Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action, was held at the Fiji Mocambo Hotel in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003.
The Workshop was attended by 32 participants from FAO Members, inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and by five resource persons. A list of participants and resource persons is attached as Appendix B.
The Technical Secretary of the Workshop, Dr David Doulman, Senior Fishery Liaison Officer, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy, called the Workshop to order, welcoming participants, resource persons and FAO colleagues. He outlined technical matters relating to the Workshop and then read a statement on behalf of Mr Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. This statement is attached as Appendix D.
The Workshop Coordinator, Mr Masanami Izumi, Fishery Officer, FAO Sub-Regional Office for the Pacific Islands, Apia, Samoa, also welcomed participants, resource persons and FAO staff to the Workshop on behalf Dr. Vili Fuavao, FAO Sub-Regional Representative for the Pacific, Apia, Samoa. Mr Izumi informed the Workshop that Dr Fuavao, unfortunately, was unable to attend because of urgent matters requiring his attention in Apia. Mr Izumi then outlined administrative arrangements for the Workshop.
Dr Transform Aqorau, Legal Adviser, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, Suva, Fiji, was selected as Workshop Facilitator. He stated that it was an honour to assume this role in the Workshop given its importance for the region. He underscored the need for good governance in fisheries, as envisaged in the Code of Conduct, if the lives of Pacific islanders were to be improved. Dr. Aqorau reminded participants that the Workshop was the beginning in the process towards the promotion of greater responsibility in fisheries, pointing out that economic development in the Pacific Islands required a sustainable resource base if present and future generations were to benefit from the utilization of the region's fish stocks.
The Agenda for the Workshop is attached as Appendix A and the list of documents is attached as Appendix C. INTRODUCTION TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES.
Dr Doulman made a presentation concerning the "Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: An Analysis of 2002 Responses". The presentation summarized self-assessment responses provided to FAO by Pacific Island countries. The responses enabled FAO to assess the extent to which Members in the region had taken steps to implement the Code, and, as a consequence, to put in place measures that promoted sustainable and responsible practices in the fisheries sector. Based on an analysis of the.
information provided by Pacific Island Members, FAO had assessed that good progress was being achieved in the implementation of the Code. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix E.
The Workshop was encouraged by the high level of responses to the questionnaire from countries in the region in 2002 and the results that were obtained concerning the implementation of the Code of Conduct. Some participants highlighted in-country problems faced with the receipt, circulation and completion of the questionnaire. It was noted that sometimes the FAO questionnaire was not completed by the competent officers but by officers who had limited understanding of the Code or of national fisheries laws. A further complication was that more than one Ministry/Department was sometimes involved in the completion of the questionnaire.
Some participants indicated that difficulty had been encountered in responding to the 2002 FAO questionnaire because of the degree of interpretation involved with some of the questions (e.g. some participants were not familiar with the terminology "limit reference point" and had interpreted this to mean "TACs", etc.). It was pointed out that such interpretation could lead to bias in responses. 10. The role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in responding to the FAO questionnaire and in promoting the implementation of the Code of Conduct was raised. It was pointed out that NGOs played an important role in the dissemination of the Code, awareness building about the Code and implementation of the Code, especially in small-scale fisheries. The Workshop was advised that NGOs were invited to respond to the questionnaire and that the quality of their responses was excellent. 11. The Workshop identified a number of issues and challenges related to the implementation of the Code. These were: how to ensure fishing and fisheries management were undertaken in a responsible manner? the reality that many fishery officers in national administrations did not have a good understanding of national fisheries laws and international fisheries instruments such as the Code of Conduct, and the need to implement fisheries policies that reflected the principles of the Code of Conduct. 12. The Workshop agreed that an important means of addressing some of the national shortcomings with respect to the completion of the FAO questionnaire and the implementation of the Code would be to establish a network of national focal points and to put in place other arrangements for the dissemination of information about the Code. 13. A further presentation was made by Dr Doulman entitled "1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Underpinning Concepts, Goals and Principles". The presentation discussed basic concepts of long-term sustainability and responsibility that underpinned the postUnited Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) international fishery instruments, including the Code of Conduct. Significantly, the Code noted that the right to fish.
carried with it certain obligations to act responsibility; it was no longer morally acceptable to act in a way that denigrated resources in the pursuit of personal gain. The Objectives and General Principles of the Code were also reviewed. This presentation of an introductory nature provided the backdrop for the subsequent presentations concerning the substantive or thematic articles of the Code. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix F. 14. In discussion, the Workshop recognized that the Code of Conduct was a voluntary instrument but that it nonetheless contained useful principles and guidelines that encouraged responsible behaviour in the fisheries sector. It was noted that there was no legal obligation to implement the Code but that there was persuasive moral weight that encouraged implementation. It was stressed that countries were often taking steps towards the implementation of the Code even though this implementation may not be explicitly recognized as such (e.g. when countries developed and implemented fishery management plans for in-shore and off-shore resources). FRAMEWORK OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES 15. A presentation was made by Dr Doulman entitled "1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Background, Purpose, Content and Role". The presentation reviewed the background to the development of the Code of Conduct, its purpose, content and intended role in facilitating long-term, sustainable resources use in the fisheries sector. The presentation also discussed the manner in which the Code was elaborated. Its structure was outlined and a number of global, regional and national initiatives aimed at its implementation were addressed. The importance of the Code's Technical Guidelines was highlighted because they not only provided detailed and practical guidance to support the implementation of the Code but they also served as concise reference documents for policy development on a range of fisheries issues. The presentation concluded that there was a need to focus more intensively on implementation and to address past shortcomings if fisheries were to be better utilized in future and if the global contribution of fisheries to food security was at least to be maintained, if not increased. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix G. 16. In discussion, some participants reported on recent changes in national fishery regulations, particularly those changes related to resource management. Most of the changes reflected the directions encouraged in the Code of Conduct although a direct reference to the Code was made in only one case. 17. Participants referred to a number of problems being encountered with the implementation of the Code. Moreover, the need for technical assistance to support the implementation of the Code, as foreseen in article 5, was raised by several participants. Examples of past FAO assistance to countries were indicated and the Secretariat responded that, in principle, FAO technical assistance was possible subject to the nature of the request and the availability of funds. Only through a specific request was it possible to ascertain the availability of such technical assistance which could be delivered through individual consultancies, specific projects or components of wider fisheries projects.
18. The Workshop recognized the value of the Technical Guidelines that had been prepared by FAO to assist countries and stakeholders implement the Code of Conduct. However, it was noted, with disappointment, that there was no Guideline for the management of small-scale fisheries. The Workshop urged FAO to elaborate such a Guideline. 19. The Workshop agreed that to assess progress with the implementation of the Code and to test the effectiveness of measures adopted to promote implementation, participants were of the opinion that the Code could serve as a benchmark to elaborate indicators for evaluating progress. LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ISSUES RELATING TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES 20. Mr Blaise Kuemlangan, Legal Officer, FAO, Rome, Italy, made a presentation entitled "Legal Considerations for the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and Related International Plans of Action". He stated that the Code of Conduct and the related international plans of actions (IPOAs) were voluntary. This meant that they were not legally binding and were intended to facilitate, inter alia, the implementation of other binding fisheries instruments, namely the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement. It was noted that those sections of the Code that reflect binding international instruments should be seen as binding on Parties to those instruments. It was noted that the measures outlined in voluntary instruments could have significant legislative implications. The fact that the Code of Conduct was now referred to in many multilateral and bilateral agreements has increased this prospect. The most meaningful way to implement the Code of Conduct from a legislative point of view was to use it as a reference document in developing legislative provisions for legal frameworks. However, this should not discourage the implementation of the Code and other voluntary instruments by non legislative means. Much could be achieved through informal arrangements for the implementation of the Code. What was important was to begin the process of adapting the Code of Conduct and the IPOAs to the needs of the State for application within national jurisdiction. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix H. 21. The Workshop took note of the status of the Code of Conduct and the relationship it had with other binding and non-binding international fisheries instruments. The Workshop also recognized the essential role of the Code in facilitating policy development and legislative review and revision. It was pointed out that many practical issues were involved in the process of translating the Code's principles and concepts into policy and legislation. These issues may be unique for each country. In this regard, the importance of a clear policy framework was stressed so as to ensure that legislation reflected and supported that policy; indeed, it was acknowledged that if policy was "right" it would greatly assist the development of legislative frameworks that facilitated the attainment of management objectives. It was further noted that the revision of legislation often required consideration of cross-sectoral issues and some non-fisheries legislation. The Workshop agreed that there was considerable merit in attempting to consolidate all issues relevant to fisheries in the principal fisheries legislation.
22. While noting that Pacific Island countries have basic framework legislation in place for fisheries, the Workshop recognized that a lack of legislative frameworks for coastal fisheries and aquaculture management was notable. 23. With respect to ensuring stakeholders' participation in fisheries management and the implementation of legislation, there was increasing awareness in Pacific Island countries of the importance of legislating the requirement to involve stakeholders in decision-making. Such involvement may occur through membership to advisory committees or through communitybased fisheries management. In this context, it was noted that some countries already involved stakeholders in the development and review of fishery management plans. 24. The Workshop was advised that some Pacific Island countries had taken steps to implement community-based fisheries management through existing legal frameworks, with considerable success. However, it was stressed that there was no blueprint approach for the development of this type of management and that it was paramount that there be careful consideration of existing governance structures including traditional social structures and institutions in order for community-based fisheries management to take firm root. Developing legislative frameworks might be needed to implement community-based fisheries management but this should be guided by clear policies on the conceptual and operational aspects of such management. 25. It was reiterated that four IPOAs have been concluded by FAO Members within the framework of the Code of Conduct. However, discussion in the Workshop focused primarily on the IPOA-IUU. It was pointed out that the four IPOAs contained provisions relating to the development of national plans of action (NPOAs). They were the mechanisms for implementing the IPOAs. It was pointed out that the NPOAs-IUU should be elaborated by June 2004. The purpose of the NPOAs was to focus national action on IUU fishing in a systematic and coherent manner and to provide the policy framework for subsequent legislative review and revision, as might be required. 26. Participants discussed possible conflict in the objectives of the Code. An example cited was the potential conflict between promoting food security (e.g. increasing production) and the need to achieve responsible resource use (e.g. production reduction). The Workshop recognized this potential for conflict but expressed the firm opinion that the main underlying principle of the Code was that fisheries resources should not be excessively exploited. It was explained that in elaborating fishery policy and in revising fishery legislation, care should be exercised to ensure that objectives were compatible. The Workshop noted that article 4 of the Code provided for, inter alia, updating, making it a "living document". Similarly, it was pointed out that national conditions and policies were likely to change through time and that policy and legislation would require review to reflect such changes. In this way, national fishery policies and legislation should also be seen as being dynamic. 27. The Workshop considered the role of NGOs in promoting the implementation of the Code of Conduct. Participants noted that most fishery administrations in the Pacific Islands took a positive stand with respect to NGOs and their involvement in the fisheries sector, encouraging their constructive engagement in review processes and decision-making. Participants expressed.
the view that policy, administrative and legislative frameworks should be reviewed and enhanced to ensure an appropriate level of participation by NGOs. 28. The Workshop agreed that NGOs had an important role to play in the fisheries sector, and especially in: Participating in the review of fishery and aquaculture policy and in the formulation and review of national fishery and aquaculture plans; Promoting awareness among stakeholders about the need to pursue responsible policies in fisheries and aquaculture. In this connection, the powerful role played by a theatre group in the Pacific Islands was mentioned as a model for promoting and sensitizing communities about important social and economic issues such as responsible fisheries; Fulfilling a "watchdog" role with respect to policies and measures being implemented by governments, and Proactively participating in other activities that promoted the health of the fisheries sector (e.g. undertaking checks on water quality, etc.). RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT 29. Ms Barbara Hanchard, Executive Officer, Forum Fisheries Agency, Honiara, Solomon Islands, made a presentation entitled "The Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands". Her presentation noted that the development of the Code of Conduct was fundamentally a global response to the progressive failure of countries to manage fisheries. It was pointed out that the Code provided the international community with a framework of principles, goals and elements for action with which to implement responsible fishery policies and legislation based on conservation, management and development of living marine resources, while taking into account the ecosystem and biodiversity. Ms Hanchard stressed that the Code covered principles and standards not only for the conservation and management of fisheries, per se, but also all aspects of fisheries including capture, processing and trade of fish and fishery products, fishing operations, aquaculture, fisheries research and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. 30. The presentation commenced by providing a brief overview of the Code of Conduct. It then addressed developments in fisheries management in the Pacific Islands which sought to give effect to the Code of Conduct and other international agreements that provided principles and international standards for the conservation, management and development of living aquatic resources. This part of the presentation focused especially on a review of fishery management initiatives that had been developed and which were consistent with the principles of the Code and other international instruments. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix I. 31. The Workshop expressed the view that fisheries management in the Pacific Islands had been generally forward looking in approach and that the regional instruments developed and implemented were consistent with the concepts and principle enshrined in the Code of Conduct. However, it was recognized that many of these instruments were directed primarily towards.
highly migratory fish stocks being harvested by foreign fishing fleets. The Workshop noted that the greatest challenge for Pacific Island countries was to maximize benefits from their tuna resources. It was further noted that these resources were the most valuable resource for many countries in the region and that in some cases they generated a substantial proportion of national income. 32. The Workshop noted that there were no regional fishing capacity limits in place and although the only tuna species considered close to being overfished were bigeye and yellowfin the region's fisheries could be described as "open access" in character. The recently negotiated Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, when in force, would be required to establish capacity and/or effort restrictions. This meant that Parties to the Convention would no longer be permitted to allow an "open access" policy and issues of allocation would require closer attention by island countries . The Workshop noted that some Pacific Island countries were fearful of limiting access as they believed that such limitations would lead to a reduction in revenue from their licensing arrangements with foreign fleets. It was further noted that in some instances rights based management was being encouraged in the Pacific Islands for both small-scale and industrial fisheries. 33. The Workshop recognized that the Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels maintained by the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) on behalf of its Members had been an effective tool in regulating the operation of foreign vessels operating in the Pacific Islands. The Register had also been highly beneficial to countries in that it had encouraged compliance by vessels with national laws. 34. Some participants noted the aspirations of their countries to establish viable and responsible domestic fishing industries as a means of replacing existing licensing arrangements with foreign fleets. The Workshop recognized that such action would bring more stable and greater social and economic benefit to island countries. 35. In response to a query on the ARGOS type of satellite monitoring system being trialed in a domestic fishery, the Workshop was advised that this system was based on orbiting satellites and had to "store and send" data that introduced delays of up to seven hours in reporting to a fisheries monitoring centre. Furthermore, it was noted that ARGOS had a disadvantage in that it was a one way system and vessels could not be "polled". Systems based on Inmarsat or other similar communication systems did not have these disadvantages. However, for developing countries and small-sized vessels, the Workshop recognized that cost was an important consideration in selecting a vessel monitoring system (VMS). RESPONSIBLE FISHING OPERATIONS 36. Dr Andrew Smith, Fishery Industries Officer, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy, made a presentation entitled "The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Article 8 ­ Fishing Operations". He stated that article 8 of the Code was probably the most important of all the articles, noting that if there were no fishing operations there would be no need for the other articles of the Code. It was explained that article 8 commenced by listing the general duties of all States irrespective of whether fishing was important to their economies or not. It was pointed out.
that even land-locked States could be involved indirectly in fishing and that the occurrence of IUU fishing was sometimes assisted by a lack of responsible behaviour by countries that were indirectly involved in fishing activities (i.e., by registering fishing vessels and then not exercising effective flag State control over them). A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix J. 37. The Workshop expressed interest in the development and costs of a new satellite surveillance method, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), and in the opportunities that this new system would provide. This system is currently being trialed by the European Union (EU). Dr Smith responded that while costs for this system were high, research into improvements was ongoing. The EU expected the system to be operational in 2004. He also noted that it was useful to consider the cost of traditional methods of aerial and surface surveillance in comparison to this new development and its additional features. 38. The Workshop took note of the principles in the Code relating to fishing gear selectivity and some participants identified the current concern in the Pacific Islands with respect to the take of small fish in tuna purse seine fisheries. The Workshop was advised that by-catch reduction devices were available for other fisheries such as trawl fisheries. It was also noted that some work had already been done involving the insertion of grids in purse seine nets but that these devices were operationally cumbersome. It was pointed out that the schooling behaviour of pelagic species presented challenges for developing appropriate by-catch devices. The issue of discards and the take of sharks in some fisheries was also raised by participants. In response, Dr Smith stated that many countries had made the capture of shark illegal or had in place regulatory measures to ensure the landing of both fins and carcasses. 39. With respect to IUU fishing in the Pacific Islands, it was noted that this is a matter of ongoing concern. The Workshop welcomed the IPOA-IUU and its associated Technical Guideline as a means of trying to address IUU fishing. Participants agreed that monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) played an important role in combating IUU fishing, but that the financial constraints of MCS in the Pacific Islands was an important consideration. 40. Some participants informed the Workshop that progress was being made towards implementing national anti-pollution legislation based on regional coordinated templates and in line with the MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships as identified in the Code but that in some instances no reference was made to discards by fishing vessels. 41. On a related matter, Dr Smith encouraged Pacific Island countries to implement requirements relating to the marking of fishing gear and to prohibit the dumping of gear at sea, while recognizing that some latitude was required in cases of accidental loss of gear. 42. The Workshop agreed that greater national awareness and coordination was required with respect to cross cutting legislation that was relevant to responsible fisheries.
RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES 43. Mr Ben Ponia, Aquaculture Advisor, Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Noumea, New Caledonia, made a presentation entitled "Responsible Aquaculture in the Pacific: The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its Application in the Pacific Islands". It was noted that guidance for responsible aquaculture could be found in the Code of Conduct. It, together with other international conventions, had established global values that States might embrace and incorporate into their national aquaculture development frameworks. The presentation also reviewed the status of aquaculture and inland fisheries in the Pacific Islands, showing that substantial activity was occurring in aquaculture and inland fisheries. Through highlighting practical examples of its application, the presentation demonstrated the relevance of the Code of Conduct to the aquaculture sector in the region. It was pointed out that Pacific Islands countries were encouraged to apply the principles of the Code to promote sustainable aquaculture. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix K. 44. The exchange of views in the Workshop concerning responsible aquaculture in the Pacific Islands highlighted the existence of considerable potential for the expansion of production. 45. The Workshop agreed that the further development of aquaculture should be based on a market-orientated approach with a strong emphasis on quality. It was noted that exchanges of experience among Pacific Island countries could be intensified and the preparation of a specific study on country experiences would be desirable. 46. The Workshop recognized that an important gap that should be closed was the lack of a policy and legal framework for aquaculture operations in many countries. The Aquaculture Bill of Tonga was mentioned as a suitable example of regulations that could be of interest to other countries. The Workshop requested FAO to facilitate such an exchange of experiences and, as appropriate, to assist in the drafting of legal texts. 47. With regard to the transfer of live animals, the Workshop suggested that within the region, the matter should be handled in a spirit of cooperation among countries but that introductions from outside the region (e.g. from Southeast Asia) should be subject to specific import risk analysis. The Workshop was informed that the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) was preparing guidelines on this subject. RESPONSIBLE POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE 48. Dr Erhard Ruckes, FAO Consultant, Rome, Italy, made a presentation entitled "Implementing Responsible Post-Harvest Practices in the Pacific Islands". He provided a brief review of the history of the Code of Conduct and its relationship with international trade in fish and fishery products and other pertinent international arrangements related to fish trade. The criteria embedded in the Code's General Principles 6.7 and 6.14 were then discussed. It was pointed out that these Principles provided the basis for the requirements formulated in article 11 of the Code of Conduct which addressed responsible fish utilization, responsible international trade, and laws and regulations relating to international fish trade.
49. The presentation highlighted the right of consumers to safe, wholesome and unadulterated fish and fishery products and the need to establish and maintain effective safety and quality assurance systems for consumer protection. These considerations were most important for responsible fish utilization. The economic implications of the production of value-added products and the identification of the origin of fish and fishery product traded were of great relevance for producing and exporting Pacific Island countries. Dr Ruckes pointed out that another high profile provision of the Code of Conduct was sub-article 11.2.15 which called on States and all relevant international cooperation and support agencies to make sure that promotion of international fish trade did not result in environmental degradation or adversely impact the nutritional rights and needs of people for whom fish was critical to their health and well-being. Of specific interest to exporting developing countries was the reference to fishing agreements and concerns related to linking access to markets to access to resources or to other criteria. 50. The presentation noted that the gist of sub-article 11.3 of the Code was that rules and regulations relating to fish trade should be transparent, as simple as possible, comprehensible and based on scientific evidence, when appropriate. The need for cooperation and consultation between States and pertinent international organizations was emphasized specifically in the article. Attention was also drawn to linkages between trade issues and other articles of the Code (e.g. articles 8, 9 and 12) and reference was made to the Technical Guidelines in support of article 11. The conclusions of the presentation highlighted the core themes of fish as food and food security and trade and environment. The challenge that these subjects constituted for the future was stressed. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix L. 51. Following the presentation, participants expressed grave concerns about the fish export quality standards that Pacific Island countries were required to meet for the entry of product into the EU- and US-markets. Some participants informed the Workshop of the measures being taken to meet the stricter standards and tight deadlines. A fear was expressed that if these standards and deadlines were not met, countries would suffer in terms of their lost trade opportunities. One country had already achieved Group 1 EU listing while two others were in the process of attempting to achieve this listing level. The Workshop noted, with appreciation, the FAO technical assistance that had been provided to some countries to enable them to raise their standards to comply with EU and US requirements. 52. The Workshop was advised that in two instances when efforts were made to introduce the stricter export standards, there had been a degree of industry resistance. This had resulted possibly from poor communication about the need to raise standards and the higher costs associated with meeting those standards (e.g. in terms of upgrading of vessels and processing facilities). However, it was noted that training programmes instituted to promote the implementation of higher standards had led to a reduction in industry resistance. It was suggested that FAO, through Globefish and the regional network of fishery information services, could assist Pacific Island countries facilitate the acceptance and implementation of the more rigorous export requirements.
53. The issue of domestic quality standards for fish and fishery products was also addressed by the Workshop. It was pointed out that in some cases quality standards for domestic products were lower than those for export products. The Workshop agreed that countries should also ensure that domestic standards were not overlooked in the process of meeting more exacting export standards. 54. It was pointed out to the Workshop that the Pacific Islands were well served with the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) training opportunities. SPC and the University of the South Pacific (USP) conducted training courses on technical aspects of post-harvest handling of fish and fishery products. The Workshop acknowledged that it was important for countries to make full use of the opportunities that were available in the region. 55. The Workshop noted the importance of participating in international trade meetings if the region's views were to be considered and if the Pacific Island countries were to try to influence outcomes. It was further noted that fisheries should not only be viewed from a narrow management or research perspective. Rather, a broader, more holistic approach that included trade, should be adopted. This was particularly significant given that tuna was the most important export from the Pacific Islands and because new products had to be considered and the problems of freight costs and tariff rates had to be addressed. 56. The Workshop recognized that a major shortcoming in the Pacific Islands was a lack of legal expertise to develop legislation and regulations that underpinned quality standards. In this connection, it was agreed that it would be beneficial for countries to seek FAO technical assistance to fill this gap, particularly in light of FAO's intimate involvement with related international conventions. INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT 57. Ms Liz Dovey, Bird Conservation and Invasive Species Officer, South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), Apia, Samoa, made a presentation entitled "Integrating Fisheries into Coastal Management in Pacific Small Island Developing States". The presentation, based on a paper by Ms Mary Power, SPREP's Coastal Management Adviser, noted that the coastal area - the interface between the land and the sea, brought together two very different, complex and yet highly interrelated ecosystems that together produced and maintained the natural resource benefits upon which much of our island communities depended. Unfortunately, these ecosystems were increasingly subject to a range of human activities that posed very significant threats to their long-term sustainability. The marine and coastal environmental issues faced by Pacific Island countries were similar to other parts of the world. The most serious of these issues were the loss of biodiversity, solid and liquid waste management, over-exploitation of living resources and destructive harvesting practices, introduction of alien species and destruction of habitat and coastal degradation due to poor land practices that led to pollution and siltation. Other driving forces throughout the region included high population growth generally but specifically in urban areas due to urban drift, and a shift from subsistence to cash economies. 58. Globally, overfishing has led to dramatic declines in coastal fish stocks. The picture in the Pacific Islands was less obvious but it was clear that there had been little focus on the status and management of inshore fisheries at the national level until quite recently as attention in the.
fisheries sector had been focused on expanding foreign income earnings from the lucrative oceanic tuna fisheries. 59. Maintaining the integrity of coastal ecosystems and protection of biodiversity in these ecosystems was challenging because of the great range of biological, physical and socioeconomic pressures involved, as well as the complexity of sectoral and institutional arrangements. Integrated coastal management or integrated coastal area management (ICM) was a comprehensive, multi-sectoral and integrated approach to the planning and management of coastal areas. Article 10 of the Code concerned the integration of fisheries into coastal management in order to assist in achieving the rational and sustainable use of scarce coastal resources. It addressed the issue of how the fisheries sector could be integrated into ICM planning so that interactions between the fisheries sector and other sectors could be taken into account in the establishment of management policy and practice with regard to the sustainable use of coastal resources. 60. This presentation provided an overview of the broad principles of ICM and article 10 of the Code, reviewed the current status of ICM and coastal fisheries management in the Pacific Islands and explored how coastal fisheries management in the region could be integrated into broader management and planning for the sustainable use of Pacific Island coastal resources, in line with the principles enshrined in article 10 of the Code. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix M. 61. Participants acknowledged the challenges faced in the Pacific Islands with respect to the integration of fisheries into coastal area management and that all of the issues discussed in article 10 of the Code were relevant. Referring to the 2002 FAO survey on the implementation of the Code, the Workshop noted that the focus of responses was on offshore matters and that more attention needed to be directed towards management and the implementation of measures for coastal areas. The Workshop considered the roles that fishery managers and other stakeholders should play in improving ICM. 62. In discussion of institutional frameworks and policy (sub-articles 10.1 and 10.2 of the Code), the Workshop agreed that there was little policy in support of ICM in the Pacific Islands, although US Territories seemed to be better placed with respect to policy development. Some participants drew the Workshop's attention to problems of inter-sectoral conflict, pointing out that such conflict often arose from institutional arrangements and legislative responsibilities. In this regard, it was observed that programmes to implement ICM should recognize and address these inter-sectoral institution and legislative conflicts. 63. It was stated that the feasibility of developing a single body of legislation to deal with ICM for which a single entity would be responsible would be difficult but that a possible strategy would be to develop a process of awareness and coordination amongst all sectors concerned. In the development of policy or legislation, the Workshop agreed that cross-sectoral communication in the form of committees might help avoid conflict and, at the same time, promote awareness. 64. The Workshop further considered the issue of the development of institutional frameworks for the development of ICM, noting that the movement away from centralised management frameworks was an option, particularly as customary custodial management was.
well established in the Pacific Islands. Some participants further noted that there was a tendency to avoid traditional methods of resource control. It was agreed that the customary management of resources should be recognized and valued and that governments had a responsibility to ensure that local populations did not over-exploit resources or exert pressure on the environment. There was a moral obligation for governments to assist customary resource owners enforce measures they had adopted. 65. The Workshop agreed that sectoral competition was not advantageous and that recognition should be made of the role that NGOs played in contributing to the promotion of ICM. For this reason, increased coordination and cooperation with NGOs should be promoted. Some participants noted the value of cross-sectoral training and opportunities to exchange regional experiences. 66. The Code promoted the need to create public awareness (sub-article 10.2.1) and some participants stated that in certain circumstances, this proved to be a challenge because of the lack of resources. As an example, it was noted that in one country there was little understanding of the value of coastal areas use by major groups. The difficulties of communicating with illiterate populations about the importance and sensitivities of these areas was mentioned. It was pointed out that some grassroot methods existed in the Pacific Islands to overcome these communication problems but that these methods were not widespread. 67. The Workshop raised issues of post-war developments and the restoration and rehabilitation of damaged environments and natural marine barriers. It was stated that it was often difficult to restore coastal environments due to development and that management might best focus on preventive measures and in having good environmental impact assessments undertaken. It was further stated that the issues concerning water quality and waste removal were not new to the region. 68. The Workshop discussed marine protected areas (MPAs). Some participants noted that this concept was relatively new to them. The objective of creating MPAs should take into account the importance of marine resources to the livelihoods of Pacific Islanders. It was pointed out that often cash incentives from external elements disturbed village community efforts to act as responsible resource custodians. It was stated that the purpose of MPAs was not confined exclusively to conservation. Rather, MPAs often had the objective of sustainability and in this sense they were more a system of zoning use. The Workshop agreed that MPAs offer a framework for decision-making by stakeholders and if they were implemented before outside commercial pressures commenced, resource owners would be in better placed to resist commercial propositions that had little regard for sustainable resource use. 69. The Workshop agreed that there were often differences in motivation between policy officers and politicians but that community-based management should be promoted at the political level. The political will to develop policy and legislation for ICM needed to be promoted so that the long-term welfare of both the resources and resource users could be taken into account.
ROLE PLAYING: MAKING RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS ABOUT FISHERIES 70. To reinforce the concepts and information presented in the Workshop concerning the Code and to encourage participants to interpret and apply them, two role-plays were included in the Workshop. The outlines of these role-plays are attached as Appendix N. 71. The Case 1 role-play demonstrated a clear understanding by the participants of the complex and sensitive issues relating to inshore fisheries management. Arguments presented in support of measures to remedy the conflict were realistic, centering on community-based approaches to management. It was noted that in order to obtain a lasting solution that would be supported by both village groups, it would have to be seen as being fair and equitable. The sensitive nature of these types of disputes were underscored and the need for tact and diplomacy by officials in dealing with villagers was of the utmost importance. The Workshop noted that the issues and solutions raised in the role-play were addressed in the Code of Conduct. In this regard, it was pointed out that the Code and particularly its Technical Guidelines could be of considerable assistance to officials and stakeholders in arriving at decisions concerning resource use conflicts. 72. Case 2 role-play, a realistic situation encountered in many Pacific Island countries, provided an opportunity for participants to demonstrate their awareness of a range of issues germane to responsible fisheries management. In particular, the role-play demonstrated a clear awareness of the: need for consultation by decision-makers with stakeholders; need to have appropriate policy and legislation in place to facilitate effective fisheries management and decision-making; need for adequate preparation of cases to ensure effective presentation to convince decision-makers; need for arguments and decisions to be supported by adequate information, particularly scientific advice and arguments that properly address the implications of different decision options; need to allow adequate time to collate information about the fishery prior to making important management decisions; importance of considering existing fishery management plans; need to promote the development of a domestic fishing industry and the potential obstacles to such development by foreign fishers; need to understand local circumstances, particularly the dependence of fishing communities on adjacent resources; need to consider local realities and/or limitations; value of learning from regional and international experiences; need to be sensitive to gender issues if they are of importance; value of being sensitive to political considerations and to present options that are attractive politically but at the same time promoting sustainable utilisation of the resource, and lack of capacity and lack of information in many fisheries administrations and the need to address these problems.
73. The role-plays and ensuing discussions indicated that the participants had a good grasp of the principles contained in the Code of Conduct and how they could be used in an applied context. FORMATION OF THE WORKING GROUPS CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Formation of the Working Groups 74. Five Working Groups were formed to enhance the participatory nature of the Workshop and as a means of generating broader and deeper discussion on the thematic articles of the Code. The Working Groups were also seen as an important vehicle for generating input from experienced fisheries personnel participating in the Workshop. The Working Groups formed were: Working Group 1: Fisheries Management Working Group 2: Fishing Operations Working Group 3: Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Development Working Group 4: Post-Harvest Practices and Trade Working Group 5: Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management 75. The composition of each of the Working Groups is attached as Appendix O. Discussion Guides to facilitate the deliberations of the Working Groups were prepared by the resource persons assigned to each Group. The Discussion Guides are attached as Appendix P. Reports of the Working Groups Working Group 1 ­ Fisheries Management 76. The conclusions of the Working Group were as follows: The Code of Conduct was a common sense logical guide for responsible fisheries that had the potential to promote sustainable fisheries management, food security and the social and economic well-being of Pacific Islanders. There appeared to be a general lack of awareness about the Code at the national level in the Pacific Islands even though at the regional level Pacific Island countries had participated in the development of regional and international fisheries law including the Code of Conduct. Fisheries management arrangements were well developed at the regional level but were not so advanced at the national level. Pacific Island countries had given due recognition to responsible fisheries management principles at the regional level but needed to ensure that national measures for responsible fisheries were compatible. Enhanced consultation on fisheries management and related issues among regional organizations in the Pacific Islands would benefit their members at national levels through coordinated and focused activities. AND THEIR REPORTS ON.
The implementation of responsible fisheries management at the national level varied from country to country in the Pacific Islands and was often hampered by limited resources and capacity. More work needed to be done at the national level to implement responsible fisheries management measures. Consultation among stakeholders was an essential element in developing and implementing fisheries management policy, legislation and plans. The promotion of wider stakeholder involvement was fundamental for responsible fisheries management so that all impacts were taken into account. Fisheries management in island countries by nature was interdisciplinary. There were, and will continue to be, overlapping responsibilities. Effective fisheries management would require authorities to coordinate and have a clearer understanding of their roles and responsibilities. It was recognized that data and information requirements were a vital prerequisite for responsible fisheries management. However, Pacific Island countries in general were poor collectors and providers of this information, particularly with respect to oceanic fisheries. 77. The recommendations of the Working Group were as follows: Where appropriate a review and assessment of national fisheries policies, laws and plans should be undertaken to determine the extent to which there was compliance with the Code and related international instruments. Depending on the outcomes of national assessments, it might be considered necessary to conduct national workshops for responsible fisheries and promote the implementation of principles and concepts of the Code. Assistance for such initiatives could be sourced from relevant regional organizations and possibly FAO. The purpose of such initiatives would be to create a greater awareness about the Code and build capacity to implement the full suite of principles contained in the Code. The establishment of focal points for the Code at national and regional levels should facilitate implementation of the Code in the Pacific Islands. Regional organizations and institutes should integrate work programmes to better advise Pacific Island countries on fisheries management measures. Educational institutions should incorporate awareness building programmes in their courses to promote the concept of responsible fisheries management as set out in the Code and related technical guidelines. In the absence of adequate data and information, adherence to the precautionary approach to fisheries management was imperative. As responsible fisheries managers, Pacific Island national administrations should meet their commitments to comply with World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) and IPOA deadlines. These deadlines were: Development and Implementation of National and Regional Plans of Action to put into effect the IPOA-IUU Fishing by 2004; Development and Implementation of National and Regional Plans of Action to put into effect the IPOA-Capacity by 2005; Application of ecosystem approach to fisheries by 2010;.
Restoration of depleted fish stocks by 2015, and Establishment of "representative networks" of marine protected areas by 2012.
Working Group 2 ­ Fishing Operations 78. The conclusions of the Working Group were as follows: Safety at sea required training at regulatory and voluntary levels. In many Pacific Island countries, there was no legislation to ensure the seaworthiness of fishing vessels. The discard rate in the region was relatively small compared to other regions of the world. There was a large problem with harbour pollution in the Pacific Islands. The fishing industry could contribute towards MCS costs by various means. Vessel monitoring systems (VMS) could be used for other purposes, including the improvement of fisheries management. The issue of fish aggregating devices (FADs) was complicated with several advantages and disadvantages. Measures were being taken by some Pacific Island countries to implement port State and coastal State measures for fishing vessels. The contribution that fishers and fishing communities could make to practical fisheries management was substantial. 79. The recommendations of the Working Group were as follows: Training in safety at sea should be carried out at school and professional fisheries levels. Insurance schemes should be encouraged where none currently exist. Where there was no legislation for safety of small fishing vessels, consideration should be given to including this legislation under the Fisheries Act. The collection of statistics and the analysis of discards should be encouraged and improved. Such discards should be verified by observers. Harbour committees should be established if necessary with a range of relevant agencies represented. Efforts should be made to ensure that industry compliance was more effective rather than relying only on enforcement. More studies were needed on the efforts of FADs and the controlled use of FADs should be introduced under vessel licensing arrangements. Port States should communicate deficiencies of foreign vessels to flag States. Fishers and fishing communities should be recognized, and have participation in, fishery management organizations.
Working Group 3 ­ Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Development 80. The conclusions of the Working Group were as follows: In many Pacific Island countries, there was inadequate aquaculture policy and legislation. This matter needed to be addressed through the formulation of appropriate policy and enabling legislation. There was a lack of relevant information about aquaculture in the region particularly among countries with fledging industries. Many countries faced potential trade restrictions for exports. These potential restrictions resulted from the need to meet specified health standards and accreditation schemes. Because of customary tenure, systems of clanship, etc., a major challenge in the Pacific Islands was the establishment of a system of rights-based aquaculture for individuals that would enable financial institutions to provide credit, enable ownership and/or exclusivity over farming space, provide some permanence for investment and be conducive to foreign investment. Genetically modified organisms and feeds were a concern in the Pacific Islands. Hatchery technology could mass produce organisms with modified genetic traits that could affect the diversity of the natural gene pool. Introductions of a new species could reduce biodiversity by causing native species to become extinct. Some species could be introduced unintentionally and not all introductions were aquaculture related (e.g. species could be transported on ships' hulls). Environmental impacts from aquaculture were often of concern because of the use of antibiotics, destruction of mangroves and the discharge of effluent. The aquaculture industry in the Pacific Islands was generally free of diseases and insidious virus. The injection of cash and the requirement for space for aquaculture development in communities, especially in rural villages, could lead to social problems and affect traditional livelihoods. 81. The recommendations of the Working Group were as follows: Countries should develop aquaculture specific policy and legislation. In this regard, governance should enable the full participation of national and local governments and it should incorporate traditional systems. In addition, countries should consider how all stakeholders and interest groups could participate in the advisory and statutory process (e.g. Fiji Locally Marine Management Associations (FLMMA)). National fisheries administrations should be the logical focal points for aquaculture. Where possible the collection of aquaculture information should be undertaken and ensure that statistics were accurate and timely and that fisheries and aquaculture statistics were disaggregated to gauge the level of development. The information should be relevant to the needs of stakeholders and case studies from the Pacific Island region should be utilized whenever possible.
Countries were urged to put in place proper regulatory measures to meet the importing standards of overseas countries. To do this, countries should consult with relevant public health authorities and/or environmental agencies. To introduce minimum standards, countries could be required to amend their legislation. Governments should allocate a high priority to establish rights-based aquaculture. Solutions for the aquaculture sector may be found within existing systems of land tenure and classification that were already well developed in the agriculture sector. When national authorities were required to make a decision concerning genetic material in which there was a lack of scientific information, the precautionary approach should be adopted. Authorities should undertake proper risk assessment and implement quarantine procedures when a new species was to be introduced. There should be a clear policy on why a species was being introduced and the introduction of new species required coordination among authorities responsible for functions such as quarantine and environmental protection. Aquaculture systems may have a minimum impact on its surrounding environment by utilising environmentally friendly technology such as zero discharge treatment and the rehabilitation of mangroves and their use as discharge retaining systems. Pacific Island countries should exploit its disease free status and "clean-green" image for marketing purposes. When planning aquaculture development in rural areas, governments should be aware of the social problems which might arise and ensure systems for conflict resolution were in place. Working Group 4 ­ Post Harvest Practices and Trade 82. The conclusions of the Working Group were as follows: Legal frameworks relating to fish trade were non-existent or inadequate in some Pacific Island countries. There was an insufficient knowledge of the role and responsibilities of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in the Pacific Island region. This was extremely critical for the fish exporting industry. Consumers' right and protection as envisaged in sub-articles 11.1.1 and 11.1.2 relating to product safety, wholesomeness and ensuring that product was not unadulterated, were critical. 83. The recommendations of the Working Group were as follows: Pacific Island countries should develop appropriate legal frameworks to cater for postharvest activities relating to fish and fishery products taking into account the establishment and operation of fish processing plants, traceability of fish and fishery products, the provisions of sub-articles 11.3.1 and 11.3.2, the suitability of the system (HACCP, auditing, inspection, certification, etc), the setting-up of a competent authority to oversee the legal framework and the environmental issues raised in subarticle 11.1.7.
To request FAO to mount a series of awareness raising Workshops with regard to WTO matters and dissemination of information relating to standards for fish and fishery products and on the issues raised in sub-article 11.2.5. To include in the legal framework for fish and fishery products the rights and protection of consumers through appropriate measures to ensure quality of product (sub-articles 11.1.1 and 11.1.2). To promote attachment programmes to countries that had an appropriate legislative framework in place. To incorporate into government corporate and strategic plans post-harvest issues as a matter of priority (sub-article 11.1.5). To encourage relevant institutions to carry out applied and adaptive research into fish (reef and aquaculture) as food, including the prevention of adverse health effects (toxins). To promote research into product development and value added products (sub-articles 11.1.6 , 12.7 and 11.1.10). To promote training and awareness building programmes on how to minimize postharvest losses (sub-article 11.1.8). To monitor the impact of trade on national food security (sub-articles 11.2.15 and 11.1.9). Working Group 5 - Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management 84. The conclusions of the Working Group were as follows: That the stakeholders involved in ICM included government departments (fisheries departments, planning, environment, lands, maritime and ports, agriculture and forestry, tourism, health, treasury, attorney-general), fishing industry associations, traditional users, traditional and other landowners (private and customary), traditional chiefs, women's groups, manufacturers, infrastructure, farmers' associations, recreational users groups, academic/scientific institutions and NGOs. That some type of committee (or committees) was/were needed to consult with the wide spectrum of stakeholders to integrate ICM planning needs. The most effective committees at present in the Pacific Island region appeared to be those operating closest to the local level (e.g. FLMMAs). Alternatives for committee chairing were considered. These alternatives included the possibility that the chair of the committee could be under the president's department, the chair could be appointed by cabinet with departments being bound by the committee's decisions, the chair and committee support (secretariat function) could rotate on an annual basis between key stakeholder groups (e.g. key departments) and that the relevant highest chief of the area could also serve as chair. An overall policy framework to give the committee(s) a mandate and specified functions should be developed and implemented. Prior to establishing a new committee, consideration of existing mechanisms should be undertaken.
New methods could be addressed for increasing awareness and participation (e.g. approaches such as those used by the RARE organization, Wan Smol Bag theatre group, and radio which was very effective in rural areas, face to face meetings and other media, open days, and working with key "movers" in a community). Existing mechanisms and studies for information (e.g. National Biodiversity Strategic Action Plan and the International Waters Programme) were recognized as being important for ICM. Research should be undertaken to fill information gaps. Sub-regional groupings should be encouraged as a means of promoting the sharing of information. 85. The recommendations of the Working Group were as follows: to consider how to consult effectively with traditional users of marine resources; to establish group(s) that would allow for the integration of coastal stakeholders' interests in a culturally appropriate way; to review existing mechanisms in each country prior to establishing new committee(s); to structure committee(s) so that they could address the issue of equality of participation of key stakeholders; to have a high-level person chairing the committee relative to its members. The chair should come from a senior post in a key department or be the chief of an area for a lower level (non-national) committee; to develop an overall policy framework to give the committee(s) a clear mandate and specified functions; to task the committee, inter alia, to review policy and legislation and to consider its adequacy in terms of cross-sectoral interests, oversee the development of an ICM plan for an area or island, monitor the plan's implementation over time, and address key issues that could arise that were not adequately considered within the plan and identify priorities for research; to create awareness using means that either directly involved the affected people or were primary methods of communication for them (e.g. radio); to assess information already available relevant to the monitoring needs of the country or area before deciding that new studies were required; to establish Coastal Management Learning Networks across and within countries; to include ICM in national oceans policy development and include ICM in national inputs at the Regional Oceans Forum 2004, and to share information among countries to the extent that this was practicable. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS BY THE WORKSHOP FACILITATOR AND PROPOSED FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS General Observations 86. The Code of Conduct was fundamental to the proper management of the fisheries resources of the Pacific Islands. The Code established detailed guidelines and provided a comprehensive framework for fisheries management and utilization. If given full effect by Pacific.
Island countries, it would strengthen and augment efforts by the international community to ensure that fisheries resources were managed sustainably. 87. The Code and its IPOAs provided a benchmark against which Pacific Island countries might measure the way in which they managed and conserved their fisheries resources. The Code was perceived as an integral part of international efforts underpinned by the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement to conserve and manage fish stocks sustainably. The Code supplemented both the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement by prescribing, in detail, measures that States should adopt not only to manage and conserve fish stocks, but also to protect and preserve the habitat in which the fish stocks occured. 88. Awareness about the Code was important for its implementation. Also of fundamental importance was an understanding of the various principles and provisions of the Code that were necessary for its effective implementation. Fisheries and other policy office holders should have an understanding of the Code. Understanding the Code was a basic requirement for its successful implementation. Therefore, greater awareness, information, dissemination and training about the Code should be encouraged. 89. Generally, there was an understanding and appreciation of the Code in the Pacific Islands and its various international instruments that impinged on the management and conservation of fisheries in the region. Indirectly and unconsciously, Pacific Islanders had been implementing various aspects of the Code in their fisheries policies and legislation. The indirect and unconscious implementation of the Code was borne out by the need to achieve good and sound governance in the fisheries sector. Pacific Island countries understood the need to ensure that their fisheries resources were not overexploited and while the policies and management and development plans they had put in place may not have been fully aligned with the letter of the Code, they were implementing the Code by implication. The reviews of legislation undertaken in the region also took into account international developments, particularly the Code, especially in setting the long-term sustainability goals as reflected in legislation. 90. It was obvious that while the Code provided a comprehensive framework for the management and utilization of fisheries resources, no guideline was available for small-scale fisheries management. This was an important issue for Pacific Island countries. Most Pacific Islanders in one way or another were involved in small-scale fishing either as harvesters or dependent on them as a source of food supply. The sustainable management of this fishery was therefore of fundamental importance to the region. This was because the impact of overexploitation of near-shore fisheries resources would impinge on food security and subsistence. 91. Aquaculture was an important fishery that was rapidly developing in the Pacific Islands. While the Code provided a very good basis for the development and management of aquaculture, there was a paucity of legal skills in the Pacific Islands to develop legislation to properly manage and control aquaculture. There was a need to develop the legal expertise required to draft legislation for aquaculture. In this regard, there was potential for FAO and other regional fishery bodies to collaborate in assisting Pacific Island countries develop aquaculture legislation.
92. Post-harvest practices and trade in fisheries were increasingly becoming more important to Pacific Island countries as they sought to expand their fish and fishery products in international markets. In this connection, these countries faced difficulties with respect to implementing the post-harvest practices and trade aspects of the Code. This was because countries lacked the legal expertise to develop the necessary legal frameworks required to meet EU and US market demands. This contrasted with the availability of technical resources to undertake necessary inspections of fish processing facilities and to examine the quality of fish and fishery products. Given the lack of legal skills to develop appropriate legislation, FAO and other regional fishery bodies were encourage to collaborate in assisting Pacific Island countries develop legislation on post-harvest practices and trade. 93. ICM was particularly important for Pacific Island countries. There was a need for decentralized management and a recognition of the role that communities and NGOs could play in assisting governments implement the ICM component of the Code. A participatory approach to decision-making with respect to ICM should be promoted and involve all relevant stakeholders. While it was recognized that a participatory approach was necessary, important decisions were being made without recourse to full consultation with stakeholders. This was often a function of the sectoral approach to management. FAO and other relevant organizations could consider collaborating in promoting training for Pacific Islanders to facilitate broader participation in decision-making process. Proposed National Regional and Global Follow-up Actions 94. The Workshop endorsed the following national and regional actions for follow-up and proposed that FAO and other international agencies, as appropriate, consider activities to further support the implementation of the Code in the Pacific Islands. 95. National action to strengthen the implementation the Code and its IPOAs: To designate an officer in the fisheries administration to serve informally as a national focal point for the Code of Conduct. This officer would receive information updates relating the Code and be responsible for ensuring that questionnaires, etc., relating to the Code were completed and returned to FAO in a timely manner. The officer would also communicate/network, as required, with his/her counterpart focal points in other Pacific Island countries. To take measures to promote greater awareness about the Code in Government and among all relevant stakeholders. Such awareness raising could involve activities including wider dissemination of the Code, the translation of key aspects of the Code into local languages, the production of comics, etc., concerning responsible fisheries behaviour, the use of theatre groups, the preparation of radio and television stories about responsible fisheries, etc. To take steps to ensure that the Code is well reflected in fisheries policies and, as appropriate, to incorporate references to, and articles of, the Code into legislation when it is reviewed and revised.
To elaborate, as required, additional fishery management plans appropriately reflecting the principles and concepts contained in the Code of Conduct. Inshore and off-shore management plans have been elaborated, or are being elaborated by Pacific Island countries. These plans reflect the principles of the Code although it may not be mentioned specifically. To consider, as a means of assessing progress with the implementation of the Code, the elaboration of Code-based indicators that could be used as a benchmark for evaluating progress. To take steps to promote at the political level policies designed to implement community-based fisheries management in small-scale fisheries as a means of promoting and implementing the Code's principles and concepts in these fisheries. Sensitization of officials, if required, should also be undertaken. To further promote stakeholders involvement in processes relating to the implementation of the Code and associated activities such as the elaboration and review of fishery policy and management plans, recognizing the important role played by NGOs. To consider the merits and applicability of MPAs as a fisheries management tool and as a means of further promoting long-term sustainable resource use. 96. Regional action to further support the implementation of the Code and the IPOAs: To encourage discussion and sharing of information and experiences about national measures being taken to implement the Code at appropriate regional fora. To encourage regional organizations to reflect the Code in the delivery of their technical services (e.g. in technical assistance provided with respect to policy development and evaluations and the drafting of fishery management plans. To encourage relevant regional institutions and agencies to incorporate information about the Code, the IPOAs and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement in fisheries management training and education courses. The inclusion of such material in courses will heighten awareness about the Code and its role in promoting more responsible fisheries. To encourage NGOs to consult and network regionally on matters that affect the implementation of the Code. 97. FAO and other international action to support the implementation of the Code and the IPOAs. To review and revise, as appropriate, the FAO Code questionnaire which is designed to collect national information about the measures being taken to implement the Code. This review would focus on removing ambiguity, clarifying terminology and making the questionnaire generally more user-friendly. To take action to facilitate the establishment of a network of Code focal points in the Pacific Islands. These focal points would serve as primary contact points in all matters relating to the Code. To take steps to elaborate a FAO Technical Guideline relating to small-scale fisheries management.
To provide, as required, policy and legal technical assistance to Pacific Island countries for the elaboration of appropriate frameworks to underpin the development of aquaculture. To provide, as required, policy and legal technical assistance to Pacific Island countries for the elaboration of appropriate frameworks relating to post-harvest issues, in particular with regard to quality standards for fish and fishery products. CLOSURE OF THE WORKSHOP 98. The Workshop Facilitator, Dr Aquorau, thanked FAO for organizing the Workshop which was timely given the imminent entry into force of the 2000 Convention for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Oceans. He thanked the participants for their active involvement in the Workshop and particularly for sharing their experiences and knowledge as to how the Code could best be implemented in the special situation of island countries. He also thanked the resource persons for sharing their knowledge and vast experiences which had helped participants broaden their understanding of the Code. He reiterated his remarks at the opening of the Workshop that the Code was essentially about good resource governance. He added that since Pacific Island countries were more dependent on fisheries resources than most other States, it was especially important for them to apply the Code in the management of fisheries resources. The Workshop Facilitator noted that it was incumbent on countries to ensure that their fisheries resources were not overexploited through careless and reckless management practices. He further noted that all stakeholders had a critical role to play in the management and utilization of fisheries and aquaculture and called on regional and international organizations to cooperate closely with each other to promote the implementation of the Code in the Pacific Islands. 99. On behalf of the FAO Sub-Regional Representative for the Pacific, Mr Izumi, the Workshop Coordinator, thanked all participants, resource persons and FAO staff for their cooperation and active participation in the Workshop. He expressed FAO's continued commitment to the implementation of the Code of Conduct in the region in close cooperation with Members and regional and international organizations. He also thanked FAO Headquarters for initiating the Workshop and for securing funding. In addition, FAO's general technical assistance programme was referred to and the need for Members to improve their communications with FAO so that the Organization's activities could be nationally and regionally enhanced. 100. The Technical Secretary, Dr Doulman, thanked the participants, resource persons and FAO colleagues for their dedication and hard work during the Workshop. He expressed his gratitude to the Workshop Facilitator who had guided deliberations in a skilled and exemplary manner. The Technical Secretary stressed the importance of the effective implementation of the Code of Conduct in the Pacific Islands where the responsible management and utilization of all fisheries and aquaculture were of the utmost social and economic importance. He noted that the Workshop had proposed a series of healthy conclusions, recommendations and follow-up actions that reflected national and regional needs with respect to the further implementation of the Code. The Technical Secretary reiterated that FAO gave high priority to the implementation of the Code, to achieving long-term sustainable outcomes in fisheries and aquaculture and to ensuring that the.
fisheries sector made a maximum contribution to food security and economic development in the region. He added that within its technical and financial capabilities and the constraints that these imposed, FAO would continue to assist Pacific Island countries deepen the implementation of the Code, particularly by building on past initiatives and achievements. The Technical Secretary concluded by recognizing the important financial support for the Workshop provided by FAO's FishCode Programme (which administers the Japanese small island developing State Trust Fund) and FAO's Regular Programme. The efforts of FAO's Sub-Regional Office for the Pacific Islands and the FishCode programme in facilitating administrative arrangements for the Workshop were also gratefully acknowledged. 101. On behalf of the participants, Mr Pasisi, thanked FAO for the Workshop, noting that it was both timely and highly beneficial. It was pointed out that the effective implementation of the Code of Conduct was a priority for Pacific Island countries. Participants expressed the view that the information and greater understanding they had obtained about the Code in the Workshop would assist them further implement the Code when they returned to their respective administrations. 102. The proposed follow-up actions to the Workshop, as reflected in paragraphs 94 to 97 of this Report, were adopted on 31 October 2003.
APPENDIX A AGENDA.
OPENING OF THE WORKSHOP INTRODUCTION TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES FRAMEWORK OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ISSUES RELATING TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE FISHING OPERATIONS RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ROLE PLAYING: MAKING RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS ABOUT FISHERIES FORMATION OF THE WORKING GROUPS AND THEIR REPORTS ON CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS GENERAL OBSERVATIONS BY THE WORKSHOP FACILITATOR AND PROPOSED FOLLOWUP ACTIONS CLOSURE OF THE WORKSHOP.
APPENDIX B LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.
WORKSHOP FACILATOR AQORAU Transform Legal Adviser Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat Private Mail Bag Suva Fiji Tel: +679 3312600 Fax: +679 3305554 Email: transforma@forumsec.org.fj PA RTICIPANTS ATTO Lara (Ms) Women's Fisheries Devlopment Nauru Fisheries and Marine Resources Authority PO Box 449 Republic of Nauru Tel: +674 4443733 Fax: +674 4443812 Email: wfdo@naurufisheries.com BOAPE George Deputy Director Licensing, Surveillance and Enforcement Department of Fisheries and Marine Resources PO Box G13 Honiara Solomon Islands Fax: +677 38730 Email: george.boape@ffa.int BROWN Colin Private Sector PO Box 2011 Rarotonga Cook Islands Tel: +682 55366 Fax: +682 25853 Email: cirugby@rugby.co.ck.
CNOSSEN Taeke Trade Policy Adiser Delegation of the European Union for the Pacific FDB Building, 4th Floor, Victoria Parade Private Mail Bag, GPO Suva Fiji Tel: +679 3313633 Fax: +679 3300370 Email: taeke.cnossen@eu.org.fj DEPAUNE Nicholas Senior Fisheries Officer (Oceanic) Nauru Fisheries and Marine Resources Authorities PO Box 449 Republic of Nauru Tel: +674 444 3733 Fax: +674 444 3812 Email: mcso@naurufisheries.com EVANS Nathan Lecturer Marine Studies University of the South Pacific PO Box 1168 Suva Fiji Tel: +679 3212942 Fax: +679 3301490 Email: evans_n@usp.ac.fi FAKALOLO Vilimo Principal Fisheries Officer Ministry of Fisheries PO Box 871 Nukualofa Tonga Tel: +676 25629/21399 Fax: +676 23891 Email: vilimof@tongafish.gov.to vilimof@kalianet.to.
FALE Poasi Fisheries Officer Ministry of Fisheries PO Box 871 Nukualofa Tonga Tel: +676 21399 Fax: +676 23891 Email: poasif@tongafish.gov.to HEFFERNAN Ally (Ms) Regional Marine Research Officer WWF-SPP PMB Suv a Fiji Tel: +679 3315533 Fax: +679 3315410 Email: gis@wwfpacific.org.fj JOSEPH Glen Deputy Director Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority PO Box 234 MH 96960 Marshall Islands Tel: +692 6254563 Fax: +692 6255447 Email: mimra@ntamar.net KWAN Kerryn (Ms) Principal Legal Officer PO Box 1874 Apia Samoa Tel: +685 22561 Fax: +685 24576 Email: kerryn_k@yahoo.com MATE Filimoni Principal Fisheries Officer (Aquaculture) Fisheries Department PO Box 3165 Lami Fiji Tel: +679 3361122/9234289.
MOBIHA Augustine Advisor Fisheries Management Group National Fisheries Authority PO Box 2016 Port Moresby NCD Papua New Guinea Tel: +675 3090444 Fax: +675 3202061 Email: amobiha@fisheries.gov.pg NAVITI William Senior Resource Manager Fisheries Department VMB 9045 Port Vila Vanuatu Tel: +678 23119 Fax: +678 23641 Email: fish-inspector@vanuatu.com.vu OPU Job Marine Species Officer (SPREP) PO Box 240 Apia Samoa Tel: +685 21929 Fax: +685 20231 Email: job@sprep.org.ws ORAK Obichang Fisheries Specialist Bureau of Marine Resources PO Box 359, Koror 96940 Palau Tel: +680 4883322 Fax: +680 4883555 Email: pmdc@palaunet.com PASISI Uhotau President Niue Island Fisherman Association PO Box 79 Alofi Niue Tel: +683 4106.
PAWUT Lamiller Manager Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Group PO Box 2016 Port Moresby NCD Papua New Guinea Tel: +675 3090444/436 Fax: +675 3202061 Email: lpawut@fisheries.gov.pg RAUBANI Jacob J. Jackson Fisheries Statistician Management and Policy Section Fisheries Department VMB 9045 Port Vila Vanuatu Tel: +678 23119 Email: raudinbani@hotmail.com RAJ Joytishna (Ms) Marine Studies Programme University of the South Pacific PO Box 1168 Suva Fiji Tel: +679 9944813 Fax: +679 3301490 Email: s11006909@student.usp.ac.fj Jndr_z_fj@yahoo.com ROI Nooroa Senior Fisheries Officer Ministry of Marine Resources PO Box 85 Rarotonga Cook Islands Tel: +682 28721 Fax: +682 29721 Email: n.roi@mmr.gov.ck SOLOFA Anama (Ms) Senior Fisheries Officer Department of Fisheries PO Box 1874 Apia Samoa Tel: +685 20369 Fax: +685 24292 Email: samoafisheries@lesamoa.net Asolofa@hotmail.com.
TAFILEICHIG Andy Director Marine Resources and Management Division Yap State PO Box 251 Colonia Yap 96943 Federated States of Micronesia Tel: +691 3502294 Fax: +691 3504494 Email: mrmdyap@mail.fm TEAFA Sa'aga Talu Crown Counsel Office of the Attorney-General Funafuti Tuvalu Tel: +688 20123 Fax: +688 20837 Email: s_tteaf@yahoo.com TEARO Kintoba Senior Fisheries Officer Kiritimati Fisheries Division Kiribati Tel/Fax: +686 81238 Email: xmasfish@fskl.net.ki TEBAITONGO Tiemaua Fisheries Officer Fisheries Division PO Box 276 Bikenibeu Tarawa Kiribati Tel: +686 28095 Fax: +686 28295 Email: tiemauat@mnrd.gov.ki TIHALA Malaki Deputy Director Fisheries Department Funafuti Tuvalu Tel: +688 20345 Fax: +688 20346 Email: mtihala@hotmail.com.
TIROBA Gideon Deputy Director (Aquaculture) Aquaculture Section Department of Fisheries and Marine Resources PO Box G13 Honiara Solomon Islands Tel: +677 30564 Fax: +677 38730 Email: gideon.tiroba@ffa.int TORIBAU Joseva Lagi Oceans Logistics Assistant Greenpeace Australia-Pacific Private Mail Bag Suva Fiji Tel: +679 3312861/9947994 Fax: +679 3312784 Email: fijivol@fj.greenpeace.org TUILOA Malakai Deputy Director Fisheries Department PO Box 3165 Suva Fiji Tel: +679 3361122/3363497 Fax: +679 363500 Email: mtuiloa@fisheries.govnet.fj YANGILMAU Celestine Assistant Executive Director Bureau of Oceanic Fishery Management PO Box 117 Koror Palau Tel: +680 4883997 Email: tunapal@palaunet.com RESOURCE PERSONS DOVEY Liz (Ms) Bird Conservation and Invasive Species Officer South Pacific Regional Environment Programme PO Box 240 Apia Samoa Tel: +685 21929 Fax: +685 20231 Email: lizd@sprep.org.ws.
HANCHARD N. Barbara (Ms) Executive Officer Forum Fisheries Agency PO Box 629 Honiaria, Solomon Islands Tel: +677 21124 Fax: +677 23995 Email: barbara.hanchard@ffa.int PONIA Ben Aquaculture Adviser Secretariat of the Pacific Community Noumea, New Caledonia Tel: +7687 262000 Fax: +7687 263618 Email: benp@spc.int RUCKES Erhard FAO Consultant Via Tespi 192 00125 Rome, Italy Tel/Fax: +39 06 52364737 Email: ruckes@virgilio.it SMITH Andrew R. Fishery Industry Officer Fishery Industries Division FAO Fisheries Department Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Tel: +39 0657056483 Fax: +39 0657055188 Email: andrew.smith@fao.org FAO SECRETARIAT DOULMAN David Technical Secretary Senior Fishery Liaison Officer Fishery Policy and Planning Division FAO Fisheries Department Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Tel: +39 0657056752 Fax: +39 0657056500 Email: david.doulman@fao.org.
IZUMI Masanami Workshop Coordinator Fishery Officer FAO Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands Private Mail Bag Apia, Samoa Tel: 685 22 127/20710 Fax: 685 22126 Email: masanami.izumi@fao.org KUEMLANGAN Blaise Legal Officer FAO Legal Office Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Tel: +39 0657054080 Fax: +39 0657054408 Email: blaise.kuemlangan@fao.org.
GUYONNET Marianne (Ms) Secretary Fishery Policy and Planning Division FAO Fisheries Department Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Tel: +39 0657053951 Fax: +39 0657056500 Email: marianne.guyonnet@fao.org TIITII Ulusapeti (Ms) Workshop Assistant FAO Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands Private Mail Bag Apia, Samoa Email: tiiul0877@yahoo.co.nz.
APPENDIX C DOCUMENTATION PRESENTED.
Agenda and Timetable Prospectus Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Southwest Pacific Ocean: An Analysis of 2002 Responses (David Doulman, FAO) 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Underpinning Concepts, Goals and Principles (David Doulman, FAO) 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Background, Purpose, Content and Role (David Doulman, FAO) The Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Management in the Western and Central Pacific (Barbara Hanchard, FFA) Responsible Fishing Operation in the Pacific Islands (Andrew Smith, FAO) Responsible Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries: What is the Code attempting to do? (Ben Ponia, SPC) Implementing Responsible Post-harvest Practices in the Pacific Islands (Erhard Ruckes, Consultant, FAO) Integrating Fisheries into Coastal Management in Pacific Small Island Developing States (Mary Power/Liz Dovey, SPREP) Legal Considerations relating to the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, the International Plans of Action and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement (Blaise Kuemlangan, FAO) Discussion Guide 1: Article 7 - Fisheries Management (Barbara Hanchard, FFA) Discussion Guide 2: Article 8 - Fishing Operations (Andrew Smith, FAO) Discussion Guide 3: Article 9 - Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Development (Ben Ponia, SPC) Discussion Guide 4: Article 10 - Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management (Mary Power/Liz Dovey, SPREP) Discussion Guide 5: Article 11 - Post-harvest Practices and Trade (Erhard Ruckes, Consultant, FAO).
APPENDIX D IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: A CALL TO ACTION OPENING STATEMENT by Ichiro Nomura Assistant Director-General Fisheries Department FAO, Rome 27 October 2003 Workshop Participants, Resource Persons and FAO Colleagues: It is a real pleasure for me to welcome you to this important Workshop that addresses the implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. As you may be aware, this Workshop has been in the planning stage for the last four years. Unfortunately, financial constraints had prevented FAO from holding it at an earlier date. We are all keenly aware of the importance of fisheries to the small island developing States (SIDS) of the Pacific Islands. For many countries, the utilization of these fisheries resources represents their food and economic mainstays. Inshore fisheries are particularly important in the food security equation and offshore tuna resources are essential for the social and economic well being of many island States. In addition, the gradual and wise development of aquaculture presents new prospects and challenges for States that are placed to promote the development of marine and inland culture. For the larger island States of the region, the dependence of sections of the population on inland fisheries is also well known. Throughout the world, a lack of responsible behaviour in the fisheries sector has led some of the world's major fisheries to decline significantly in productivity and, in some cases, to collapse. This situation has arisen despite strenuous efforts to conserve and manage resources at both the national and regional levels. At last count in 2002, FAO estimated that approximately 75 percent of world fisheries are already being fully exploited, overexploited or depleted. Where fish stocks are seriously depleted, the lack of effective intervention will inhibit, if not prevent, the re-building and restoration of those stocks. The Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries was negotiated within FAO shortly after the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. The significance of the Code and the importance of ensuring that it is implemented were underscored again in 2002 at the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Moreover, since 1995 when the Code was adopted by FAO Members, references to it have occurred repeatedly in the annual resolutions dealing with fisheries and oceans that have been adopted by the United Nations General Assembly. These references emphasize the importance that the international community gives to the Code of Conduct as a vehicle for improving the way in which world fish stocks are utilized. Implementation of the Code of Conduct requires concerted action by national Governments and all other stakeholders involved in fisheries. Implementation requires that concrete measures be put in place that will promote responsible and long-term sustainable solutions. This may also involve significant sacrifice as fishing opportunities are reduced or cancelled for some fishers and fishing communities. In very general terms, the Code calls for the implementation of measures that will ensure that fish stocks are utilized in such a way that their future reproduction and productivity is not jeopardized.
The Code of Conduct is a comprehensive document that looks at the fishery sector in a holistic and integrated manner. From a preliminary glance through the Code, it will be noted that there are twelve Articles. Articles 6 to 12 address the thematic areas including the general principles, fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture development, integration of fisheries into coastal area management, post-harvest practices and trade and fisheries research. In addition, Article 5 addresses the important matter of the special requirements of developing countries. During this Workshop, each of these areas will be reviewed and it is my hope that when you return to your countries and to your fishery administrations that you will have a first hand knowledge of the different aspects of the Code and why and how it is important that it should be implemented. I am mindful of the Communiqué issued by the Fifth Meeting of the FAO South-West Pacific Ministers for Agriculture in Suva in March 2003 wherein the Ministers "Noted the continuing assistance provided by FAO for implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries at the national and regional levels and suggested that regional/national workshops be conducted." This Workshop, although programmed well in advance of the Fifth Meeting of Ministers, serves to respond to one of the calls made by the Ministers at that meeting. I have looked through the Agenda for the Workshop and I believe that it is quite a heavy one. I urge you all to work hard and to take every opportunity to interact with other participants, resource persons from South Pacific partner organizations and FAO staff. It is my hope that by participating actively in the Workshop, you will return to your countries better equipped and more professionally able to face the major tasks of promoting long-term sustainable measures in your nations' fisheries. Prior to concluding, I would also like to thank our South Pacific partner organizations who have agreed to release their staff to participate in this exercise. Working together as a team and seeking to achieve the same objectives, I believe firmly that we can make a difference in this region where fisheries underpin all social and economic institutions. It would be remiss of me if I did not also mention that the major proportion of funding for this Workshop is coming from a FAO Japanese Trust Fund that is designed specifically to promote responsible fisheries in small island States. FAO is very grateful to the Japanese Government for this funding support, which is administered as part of the Fisheries Department's FishCode Programme of Global Partnerships for Responsible Fisheries. The FAO Regular Programme has also contributed funding to the Workshop. Thank you very much for your attention.
APPENDIX E IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: AN ANALYSIS OF 2002 RESPONSES David J. Doulman1.
ABSTRACT This paper summarizes the responses to the 2000 Code of Conduct questionnaire that was submitted on a self-assessment basis by FAO Members from the Southwest Pacific Region. The purpose of this and previous questionnaires was to gauge the extent to which Members are taking steps to implement the Code, and as a consequence, put in place measures that promote sustainable and responsible practices in the fisheries sector. Based on an analysis of the information provided by Members is assessed that sound progress is being achieved in the Southwest Pacific Region to implement the Code of Conduct. INTRODUCTION Article 4 of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries states, inter alia, that FAO will report to the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) concerning the implementation of the Code. The biennial report provided to COFI is based on a self-assessment questionnaire2 that is completed on a voluntary basis by FAO Members. In addition to reporting to Members, questionnaires are also provided to non-governmental organizations and regional fishery bodies. Since the adoption of the Code of Conduct, three reports have been made to COFI, the most recent report being to the 25th Session of COFI which met in Rome in February 2003. This paper draws on information compiled for the most recent COFI Session. The paper summarizes the responses from FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific area. Not only is the information from Members important to gauge the extent and rate at which the Code of Conduct is being implemented, the regional collation of information relating to the Code is also useful a means for indicating regional priorities and development assistance needs for the international donor community. A clear specification of these priorities and needs can assist donors better channel assistance to the fisheries sector.3 Responses to the Code of Conduct questionnaire Table 1 summarizes the total level of response to the FAO questionnaire in 2000 and 2003 as well as the response rates for the Members from the Southwest Pacific. In 2000, five Members (38 percent) responded to the questionnaire out of a regional total of 13 Members. In 2002, there was a major improvement in the response rate when it increased to 79 percent, or 11 Members out of a total of 14 Members. Between 2000 and 2002, the change in the response rate was 120 percent.
Senior Fishery Liaison Officer, Fisheries Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy. Since the information provided to FAO by its Members is done so on a voluntary and self-assessment basis, FAO is not in a position to verify the accuracy of the information provided. 3 In this report, "fishery" or "fisheries" also implies, as appropriate, "aquaculture".
TABLE 1: Comparison of the regional and total response rate to the questionnaire on the Code of Conduct for 2000 and 2002.
Regions 2000 Number of Members in region 13 Number of Responses 5 102 2002 Number of Members in region 14 Number of Responses 11 105 120 3 2 Change in response rate (%).
Southwest Pacific Total responses Total FAO Members (as at 1 November) Number of responses as a proportion of the total FAO Membership (%).
Total responses to the questionnaire by FAO Members in 2000 and 2002 were 102 and 105 Members, respectively. Total responses increased by three percent over these two periods. When compared to the total number of FAO Members that were invited to respond to the questionnaire, the response rate was 56 percent in 2000 and slightly higher at 57 percent in 2002. Table 2 shows the Southwest Pacific Members that responded, or did not respond, to the questionnaire in 2000 and 2002. All Members that responded in 2000 also responded in 2002. Significantly, Table 2 shows clearly that there was a marked increase in reporting by Members in the region. This is a most encouraging development and indicates the importance attached to the Code of Conduct in the Southwest Pacific region. TABLE 2: Southwest Pacific Region FAO Members responding to the questionnaire on the Code of Conduct in 2000 and 2002.
Country Australia Cook Islands Fiji Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Vanuatu Responded in 2000 Yes No Yes Yes No Yes No No No Yes No Responded in 2002 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes.
PRIORITY RANKING OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT OBJECTIVES AND THEMES Objectives The Code of Conduct has a total of ten Objectives. They address each of the thematic areas of the Code. In their responses Southwest Pacific Members, as shown in Table 3, gave a high ranking to the majority of the Code's Objectives, with a concentration of responses in the extremely relevant for all Objectives. Such ranking indicated that the Code is highly relevant to the fisheries section in the region.
TABLE 3: Priority rating by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region of the Objectives of the Code of Conduct (Ranking: 1=not very relevant, 3=relevant, 5=extremely relevant).
Objectives Objective A: Establish principles for responsible fisheries considering all their relevant biological, technical, economic, social environmental and commercial aspects. Objective B: Establish principles and criteria to implement policies for the conservation of fishery resources and fisheries management and development. Objective C: Serve as an instrument of reference to improve legal and institutional framework for appropriate management measures. Objective D: Provide guidance to formulate and implement international agreements and other legal instruments. Objective E: Facilitate and promote cooperation in the conservation of fishery resources, fisheries management and development. Objective F: Promote the contribution of fisheries to food security and food quality giving priority to the nutritional needs of local communities. Objective G: Promote protection of living aquatic resources and their environments and coastal areas. Objective H: Promote trade in fish and fishery products in conformity with relevant international rules. Objective I: Promote research on fisheries as well as on associated ecosystems and relevant environmental factors. Objective J: Provide standards of conduct for all involved in the fisheries sector. 1 2 3 1 4 5 5 4.
Themes There are eight thematic areas in the Code of Conduct, as indicated in Table.
Southwest Pacific Members generally gave a high priority or priority rankings to most of the themes. Reflecting the small-island status of most Members in the region, inland fisheries development was given a lower priority ranking overall than the other thematic areas. TABLE 4: Prioritization of themes in the Code of Conduct by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region.
Theme Fisheries Management Fishing Operations Aquaculture Development Integration of Fisheries into Coastal and Basin Area Management Post-harvest Practices Trade Fisheries Research Inland Fisheries Development Top Priority 9 6 4 3 6 4 7 1 Priority 1 4 5 6 3 6 3 5 Low Priority 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 4.
CONFORMITY OF FISHERIES POLICIES AND NATIONAL LEGISLATION AND POLICIES WITH THE CODE OF CONDUCT Southwest Pacific Members reported that most had fisheries policies and legislation that fully or partially conform to the thrusts of the Code of Conduct, as shown in Table.
Most Members did not report on their efforts to make the Code more widely known among fishers and their communities.
Nonetheless, some Members noted that they had taken steps to implement community-based fisheries management, distributed copies of the Code to stakeholders and consulted with stakeholders to publicize the Code. TABLE 5: FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region with fisheries policies and national legislation conform to the Code of Conduct.
Yes 5 Conformity with the Code No 2 Partially 4.
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT Southwest Pacific Members reported that they had developed a total of 64 management plans for marine fisheries of which nearly 100 per cent had been fully implemented (Table 6). Only one inland fishery management plan had been elaborated and that plan was about 90 percent implemented. TABLE 6: Number of fishery management plans reported to have been developed and implemented by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region for marine and inland capture fisheries in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
Number of plans developed Marine Inland 64 1 Percentage of plans implemented Marine Inland 57 100.
Four Members reported that their fishery management plans cover all marine catches landed and some 90 percent of landings in the inland fisheries. Most marine management plans contain measures designed to promote responsible resource use in accordance with the Code of Conduct. Responses to the measures taken for marine capture fisheries are shown in Table.
TABLE 7: Measures in marine fishery management plans designed to promote responsible resource use in accordance with the Code of Conduct in the Southwest Pacific Region.
Measure Yes To ensure the level of fishing is commensurate with the state of fisheries resources 8 To allow depleted stocks to recover 7 Contain stock specific target reference points 8 Selectivity of fishing gear 7 To prohibit destructive fishing methods and practices 6 To address fishing capacity including the economic conditions under which the industry 7 operates To address biodiversity of aquatic habitats and ecosystems including the identification of 6 specific habitats To provide for stakeholder participation in determining management decisions 8 To provide for the protection of endangered species 8 To address the interests of small-scale fishers 1 No 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 1 1 3 Partially 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.
Similarly, of the Members reporting on inland fisheries, most indicated that their management plans contained measures to promote sustainable resource use. Responses to the measures being taken are shown in Table 8.
TABLE 8: Measures in inland fishery management plans designed to promote responsible resource use in accordance with the Code of Conduct among FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region.
Measure To ensure the level of fishing is commensurate with the state of fisheries resources To allow depleted stocks to recover Contain stock specific target reference points Selectivity of fishing gear To prohibit destructive fishing methods and practices To address fishing capacity including the economic conditions under which the industry operates To address biodiversity of aquatic habitats and ecosystems including the identification of specific habitats To provide for stakeholder participation in determining management decisions To provide for the protection of endangered species To address the interests of small-scale fishers Yes 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 No 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Partially 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.
To enhance fisheries management, Members have been engaged in a range of activities including the revision of fisheries legislation, identifying important fish habitats and consulting with stakeholders about management plans. Target reference points have been developed by one Member for all marine fisheries while other Members have developed such reference points for some inshore (beche-de-mer, prawns, lobster and barramundi) as well as offshore (tuna) resources. Three Members reported that stock specific reference points are being approached or exceeded. To address this problem, these Members have taken steps to reduce fishing effort and have introduced community-based fisheries management. Two Members indicated that reference points had not been exceeded. Most Members reported that the precautionary approach had been applied. The application of precautionary measures has included area and seasonal closures and setting total allowable catches (TACs) at lower levels that a stock should be able to support. FISHING OPERATIONS Southwest Pacific Members indicated that in most cases fishing is properly authorized, as indicated in Table.
The steps that Members have taken to ensure that fishing is carried out in a responsible manner include the use of comprehensive licensing arrangements and the issuance of quota, on board observers, surface and aerial surveillance and the collection and sharing of information on a regional basis. TABLE 9: Fishing operations in the Southwest Pacific Region marine capture fisheries that conform to the Code of Conduct.
Is all fishing in your EEZ properly authorized and is fishing in international waters or in the EEZ of another State reported, monitored and carried out in a responsible manner? Yes No Partially 7 1 3 Have measures been taken to limit bycatch and discards? Has VMS been implemented?.
Partially 0.
Partially 5.
However, few Members have taken steps to limit bycatch and discards. One Member does not permit the discarding of fish taken under individual transferable quota (ITQ) allocations. Another member has implemented devices designed to reduce captures of bycatch (e.g. turtle excluder devices (TEDs) and bycatch excluder devices (BEDs) devices in trawl fisheries). Two Members have reported that they have implemented fully vessel monitoring systems (VMS) while two others have partially implemented VMS. Other Members plan to implement VMS in the future. AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT Southwest Pacific Members reported that aquaculture development is managed under fisheries and environmental legislation. Three Members have comprehensive legislation in place while two other have legislation progressing through domestic processes for acceptance. Two Members reported no legislative framework at all for aquaculture. Three Members4 have codes of best practice but the remainder have not developed and adopted such a code (Table 10). In one case, government has issued guidelines for aquaculture development and industry has issued its own environmental code. TABLE 10: Number of FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region that have developed and adopted of a code or instrument of best practices for aquaculture in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
Government 2 Producers 3 Suppliers 1 Manufacturers 0 Others 1.
Most Members indicated that they undertake environmental assessments of aquaculture operations, monitor aquaculture operations and seek to minimize harmful effects on the introduction of non-native species or genetically altered stocks used in aquaculture but that there is a degree of variation in the level of rigour among Members (Table 11). It was reported that measures being developed to promote responsible aquaculture include policy and legislation reviews, water filtration, awareness building about the need for responsible aquaculture and the fostering of industry groupings. TABLE 11: Number of FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific region with procedures to assess, monitor and minimize harmful effects on species introductions or genetically altered stocks in aquaculture in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
Undertake environmental assessments of aquaculture operations Yes No Partially 6 4 0 Monitor aquaculture operations Yes 7 No 4 Partially 0 Minimize harmful effects on the introduction of non-native species or genetically altered stocks used for aquaculture Yes No Partially 7 4 0.
INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT Southwest Pacific Members reported that most of them have legislation in place to address the integration of fisheries into coastal management. The level of conflict between fisheries and other activities in the coastal zones varies significantly among Members and activities as shown in Table 12.
Some Members have more than one code of best practice. Only two have Codes established by government.
TABLE 12: Conflict levels within the fisheries sector and between the fisheries sector and activities of other sectors reported by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region to the implementation of the Code of Conduct.
Type of conflict between Coastal and industrial fisheries Coastal fisheries and coastal aquaculture Gear types in coastal areas Fisheries and recreational activities Fisheries and port development Fisheries and mining activities Strong 1 1 Moderate 1 3 5 5 1 Light 3 2 2 7 4 None 2 3 2 2 1 5.
Table 13 indicates that about half of the Members reported that they did not have mechanisms in place to resolve conflicts that might arise in the coastal zone. TABLE 13: Number of FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region with mechanisms to resolve conflicts over the use of coastal resources in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
Conflict type Coastal and industrial fisheries Coastal fisheries and coastal aquaculture Gear types in coastal areas Fisheries and recreational development and activities Fisheries and port development Fisheries and mining development Yes 4 5 5 5 5 5 No 3 4 4 4 3 4.
POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE Five Southwest Pacific Members reported that they have effective food safety and quality assurance systems for fish and fishery products (Table 14). Members indicated that activities such as training in HACCP requirement and fish handling, minimization of wastage in processing and auditing of export facilities were being pursued as a means of improving post-harvest practices. TABLE 14: Numbers of FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region with or without an effective food safety and quality assurance system for fish and fisheries products.
Members advised that in most cases it was possible for producers to determine the origin of fish and fisheries products while this was possible for consumers in about 50 percent of cases (Table 15). Most Members reported that they have not taken steps to ensure that processors, brokers etc do not deal in illegally landed product. However, three Members have measures in place to address this problem including requirements that licensed fishers can only land fish and that landings must be documented and subject to other inspections. TABLE 15: Number of FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region that can or cannot identify the origin of fish and fisheries products.
Processors Yes 6 No 1 Yes 3 Consumers No 5.
FISHERIES RESEARCH Four Southwest Pacific Members indicated that there are reliable stock status estimates for 112 stocks or 67 per cent of the total stocks in these countries. Many Members reported that they collect reliable data on catch and fishing effort while only three Members of those reporting indicated that they have adequate personnel to generate data to sustainably manage fisheries. Generally, Members indicated a lack of staff to undertake stock assessment, database development and statistics. TABLE 16: Summary information relating to responses by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region concerning the status of fisheries research in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
Stock status Is timely, complete and reliable statistics collected on catch and fishing effort? Yes No Are there qualified personnel to generate data to sustainably manage fisheries? Yes No.
Number of stocks for which reliable estimates available 112.
Percent of total important national stocks 67.
Most Members reported the availability of catch and effort data from both commercial and artisanal fisheries, research vessels data, on-board sampling data and in-port sample data to support the development of fishery management plans (Table 17). Some Members reported that sanctions are applied to fishers who fail to meet data requirements. Four Members reported that they monitor the state of the environment and bycatch and discards. TABLE 17: Availability of data for input to fishery management plans by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region.
Type of data Catch and data effort from commercial and artisanal fisheries Research vessel surveys On-board sampling from commercial vessels In-port sampling surveys Yes 7 5 6 7 Availability of data No 1 4 2 1.
Partially 1 0 1 0.
INTERNATIONAL PLANS OF ACTION Southwest Pacific Members have generally reported, with some exceptions, that they have not taken action to implement the four international plans of action (IPOAs), as indicated in Table 18. However, some Members have commenced initial assessments. TABLE 18: Summary information relating to responses by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region concerning the implementation of the International Plans of Action.
IPOA- Capacity Yes No 1 4 IPOA-Shark Yes No 0 5 IPOA- Seabirds Yes No 0 0 IPOA-IUU Yes No 3 5.
Three Members noted that they do not have plans to meet the deadlines for the implementation of the IPOAs through the elaboration of national plans of action (NPAs). Three Members will have their NPA-sharks finalized by early 2003. Longline fisheries are reported in most Members but only in one case are birds considered to be problematic. This means that the IPOA-seabirds is of little relevance to these Members even though three Members have advised that they will develop NPAs-seabirds. Tori lines are required to minimize seabird catches in the longline fishery of one Member. IUU fishing by foreign vessels was reported by two Members to impact efforts to achieve sustainable fisheries and two Members indicated that they would have NPAs-IUU in place in 2003. Other Members indicated their intentions to develop such NPAs. INTERNATIONAL FISHERY INSTRUMENTS International fora and resolutions have called upon States to ratify, accede to, or accept, as appropriate, and implement international fishery instruments as a means of strengthening fisheries conservation and management. Instruments referred to, in particular, are the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. Table 19 shows Members that have ratified, acceded to, or accepted the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. It also indicates the number of Members that have the intention to take such action. In summary: TABLE 19: Ratification, accession or acceptance of the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement by FAO Members in the Southwest Pacific Region.
1993 FAO Compliance Agreement No Intention to do so 3 6 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement No Intention to do so 0 2.
No Southwest Pacific Member has accepted (as at 1 June 2003) the 1993 Compliance Agreement although six Members have the intention to do so. No Member is providing data to FAO concerning vessels registered on the high seas. Eight Members have ratified the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and two Members have the intention of doing so. National constraints to the implementation of the Code of Conduct and proposed solutions Responses from Southwest Pacific Members concerning constraints to the implementation of the Code of Conduct had a high degree of commonality. Members identified the following constraints: a lack of technical and financial resources to support implementation of the Code; inappropriate government policies to foster and support implementation; insufficient training and awareness about the Code among stakeholders; a lack of fishery management plans, and a lack of incorporation of the Code objectives and principles in national fisheries legislation. Members proposed the following solutions to promote the more effective implementation of the Code: media campaigns to increase awareness about the Code; the revision of national policies and legislation;.
the development of additional fishery management plans using the Code as framework, and the wider distribution of additional copies of the Code, technical guidelines and simple language version of these documents. CONCLUSION The implementation of the Code of Conduct requires strong political commitment on the part of Members to achieve responsible fisheries. In many cases, these commitments will entail fundamental changes to fisheries policies and legislation and in the way that fisheries administrations operate on a day-to-day basis. International and regional organizations can play an important role in supporting national action to implement the Code but only governments are in a position to introduce the changes required to secure sustainable outcomes in the fisheries sector. Non-governmental organizations also have a valuable role to play, especially in fostering awareness about the Code in fishing communities. A review and analysis of the information provided by Members in the Southwest Pacific Region indicates that steps are being taken to implement the Code, albeit on a variable basis. It is highly commendable that the response rate to the 2002 questionnaire showed a marked increase over the response rate in 2000. From an analysis of the information presented in the questionnaires and summarized in this paper, it is concluded that good progress is being made in the Southwest Pacific Region to implement the Code but that concerted and sustained action is still needed by Members if the Code is to achieve its objectives fully. In this connection, Members should address the constraints that have been identified in implementing the Code and focus attention on the solutions that have been proposed.
APPENDIX F 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES: UNDERPINNING CONCEPTS, GOALS AND PRINCIPLES David J. Doulman5.
ABSTRACT This paper discusses basic concepts of long-term sustainability and responsibility that underpin the post-UNCED international fisheries instruments including the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Significantly, the Code points out that the right to fish carries with it certain obligations to act responsibility; it is no longer morally acceptable to act in a way that denigrates resources in the pursuit of personal gain. The Objectives and General Principles of the Code are also reviewed. They provide the backdrop for the substantive sections of the Code in Articles 7 to 12. BACKGROUND The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries is a voluntary or soft-law instrument. This means that governments and other stakeholders are urged to implement it but, unlike binding or mandatory agreements such as the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement, there is no legal obligation for governments to implement them after they have been accepted and after they have entered into force. There is, however, in the case of the Code of Conduct, a moral obligation for governments to take steps to promote responsible and long-term sustainable fisheries.6 CONCEPTS OF RESPONSIBILITY AND SUSTAINABILITY Since the early 1990s, two important new concepts in fisheries management have emerged and have entered the fisheries vocabulary and practice. These concepts are long-term sustainability (1992) and responsible fisheries (1995). Increasingly, these concepts are used interchangeably to convey the same idea. In this regard, they should be considered mutually reinforcing and aimed at the same goal. Underlying the achievement of long-term sustainability and responsible fisheries is the assumption that governments are prepared to politically support action to achieve these objectives. In some cases, this requires governments to implement unpopular decisions, including closing fisheries or reducing the fishing effort (i.e., reducing the numbers of fishers and vessels operating in a fishery). In extreme cases, it might mean imposing moratoria on fishing for particular stocks that are threatened and which need rehabilitation. This action has been taken, for example, in the North West Atlantic Ocean for some cod and plaice stocks. Long-term sustainable fisheries In the 1980s, concern about the environment and its degradation focused attention sharply on natural resources, including the way in which fisheries resources were being used and misused. This concern led to a number of initiatives, including the 1991 FAO/Netherlands den Bosch Conference on Agriculture and the Environment, which refined and adopted the term sustainable development. It defined sustainable development as:.
The author is Senior Fishery Liaison Officer, Fishery Policy and Planning Division, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy. The views expressed in the paper are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of FAO or any of its Members. 6 In this paper the term `fisheries' refers, as appropriate, to `aquaculture'.
the management and conservation of the natural resource base and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for the present and future generations. Such development (in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources; is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and socially acceptable.7 The 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), also known as the Earth Summit, set the stage for action in the 1990s and beyond by adopting Agenda 21: A Programme of Action for Sustainable Development. The World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), which was held 10 years after UNCED in Johannesburg in 2002, reinforced Agenda 21 and led to the adoption of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (JPI). This Plan is significantly different to Agenda 21 in that it prescribes timetables for the achievement of certain important events. The JPI addresses fisheries issues in an extensive manner. Emphasis is placed on marine fisheries but it also stresses the importance of aquaculture development and small-scale fisheries. An important outcome of UNCED was the agreement that the concept of long-term sustainability should be the underpinning premise for the use of renewable resources. Moreover, it was recognized that the implementation of policies that facilitate long-term sustainability in fisheries should take into consideration social, cultural, economic, physical and development considerations. In doing so, those policies should focus on two critical elements: inter-generational equity in terms of access to resources, and measures designed to regulate the use of resources in order to prevent degradation. Measures that could improve fisheries management and be used in key action areas are spelled out in Chapter 17 of Agenda 21. This chapter is entitled "Protection of the oceans, all kinds of seas, including enclosed and semi-enclosed seas, and coastal areas and the protection, rational use and development of their living resources." Chapter 17 is divided into the following programme areas8: integrated management and sustainable development of coastal and marine areas, including exclusive economic zones; marine environmental protection; sustainable use and conservation of marine living resources of the high seas; sustainable use and conservation of marine living resources under national jurisdiction; addressing critical uncertainties for the management of the marine environment and climate change; strengthening international (including regional) cooperation and coordination, and sustainable development of small islands. Of significance to the promotion and achievement of sustainable fisheries and the implementation of Chapter 17 are Sections 2 and 3 of Agenda 21, which address, respectively, strengthening the role of major groups (i.e., stakeholder participation) and the means of implementation.
FAO. (1991). The den Bosch declaration and agenda for action on sustainable agriculture and rural development. FAO. Rome. 63 pages. 8 Each of the programme areas addresses: objectives; activities (including the management of related activities, data and information, and international and regional cooperation and coordination); and means of implementation (financing and cost evaluation, scientific and technological means, human resource development and capacity building).
Agenda 21, in the post-UNCED period, has stimulated the inclusion of the concept of long-term sustainable management in a number of other international instruments such as the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and conventions establishing regional fishery management organizations (RFMOs). The importance of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its related four international plans of actions (IPOAs) and technical guidelines 9 that are designed to facilitate the implementation of the Code, are specifically recognized in the JPI10. Significantly, WSSD agreed on specific deadlines for five major fisheries issues: Development and Implementation of National and Regional Plans of Action to put into effect the IPOA-IUU Fishing by 2004; Development and Implementation of National and Regional Plans of Action to put into effect the IPOA-Capacity by 2005; Application of ecosystem approach to fisheries by 2010; Restoration of depleted fish stocks by 2015, and Establishment of "representative networks" of marine protected areas by 2012. These timeframes place an additional and heavy burden on governments, stakeholders and RFMOs in their attempts to improve the way in which fish stocks are used. Responsible fisheries The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries introduced the notion of responsible fisheries. It implies that all those engaged in the fisheries sector, regardless of their different roles, should act in a way that does not prejudice access to resources by current or future generations. In this way, governments, fishers, processors, consumers and other stakeholders are morally challenged and encouraged to take responsibility for their actions, or lack of action, if this leads to resources being depleted. Significantly, the notion of responsibility also conveys the idea that stakeholders should be socially accountable and answerable and act in a trustworthy way. In the past, little attention was given to the apportionment of blame when a fishery collapsed. This is no longer the case. In the case of a collapse, it is likely that stakeholders will be called on to answer why this situation has occurred. Indeed, the first principle of the Code of Conduct (Article 6) states that:.
The Technical Guidelines so far published (July 2003) have addressed:.
Fishing operations; 1.1 Fishing operations: vessel monitoring systems;.
Precautionary approach to capture fisheries and species introductions;.
Integration of fisheries into coastal area management;.
Fisheries management; 4.1 Fisheries management: conservation and management of sharks; 4.2 Fisheries management: the ecosystem approach to fisheries;.
Aquaculture development; 5.1 Aquaculture development: good aquaculture feed manufacturing practice;.
Inland fisheries;.
Responsible fish utilization;.
Indicators for sustainable development of marine capture fisheries;.
Implementation of the international plan of action to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. Further technical guidelines to address other important issues (e.g. management of small-scale fisheries and the implementation of the IPOA-capacity) will be prepared and distributed. 10 The JPI identified a number of actions in the area of institutional policies that would bolster its implementation, and highlighted the strengthening of national and regional capacity in marine science and management, as required action. There were no references to fisheries trade issues or to the financial resources required to facilitate the implementation of the fisheries components of the Plan.
The right to fish carries with it the obligation to do so in a responsible manner so as to ensure effective conservation and management of the living aquatic resource. In RFMOs, for example, in the interest of promoting transparency and a franker approach to fisheries management, contracting and non-contracting parties that fail to honour commitments or undermine the work of these organisations are being named in meetings and in the international press (a so-called `name and shame' approach). Previously, such country naming was not encouraged in RFMOs or other international fora for a in the interests of promoting harmony and cooperation among members. This is no longer the case, and the need to deal effectively with management issues is taking precedence over diplomacy. OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CODE Objectives The Code of Conduct has 10 objectives that focus on five types of actions. The Code stipulates that the objectives are to be pursued in a manner consistent with international law. This principally means that the Code is to be applied in a manner consistent with the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 Convention) and other important instruments such as the 1995 United Nation Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement). The actions addressed in the Code's objectives are: to establish principles......; to serve as an instrument of reference........; to provide guidance.......; to facilitate and promote cooperation......; to promote standards of conduct...... What the objectives seek to do in the Code is to spell out, in a clear and precise manner, the direction in which governments and stakeholders should move as they implement polices and related technical measures to achieve long-term sustainable fisheries. To move in this direction a government and stakeholders should adopt policies consistent with predetermined goals (e.g. a reduction of by-catches, rehabilitation of stocks to certain levels, etc.) and, in turn, devise and implement technical measures to achieve these goals. A government can conclude that it has realized its goal of addressing a particular fisheries problem if the policies and measures that it has put in reduce the incidence of the problem being addressed. Ideally, there should be indicators that can quantify the extent to which goals have been achieved. General Principles The General Principles or skeleton of the Code of Conduct provide an introduction to the contents of the substantive issues in Articles 7 to 12. The General Principles summarize the essential elements of those articles. The substantive articles of the Code provide the flesh to cover and fill out the skeleton. The General Principles, and indeed the other articles of the Code, are presented in the conditional tense (i.e. States should ..... act in a particular way). This is because the Code is a voluntary instrument. Although there are no sanctions imposed for not acting in a particular way or in adhering to the Code's prescriptions, the weight of moral persuasion serves to encourage responsible behaviour and action.
In contrast, in non-voluntary instruments such as the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement or the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement, States accepting these instruments do so by making a formal commitment. As a consequence, States are obligated (i.e. States shall or will ..... act in a particular way) to undertake certain activities or to refrain from certain actions as a means of fulfilling their obligations under such agreements. The General Principles of the Code of Conduct has 19 sub-clauses. In implementing the Code, the General Principles urge that States should: conserve aquatic ecosystems, recognizing that the right to fish carries with it an obligation to act responsibly; promote the interests of food security, taking account of inter-generational considerations; prevent overfishing and excess fishing capacity; base management decisions on the best scientific advice available; apply the precautionary approach; develop further selective and environmentally safe fishing gear; maintain the nutritional value, quality and safety of fish products; protect and rehabilitate critical fishery habitats; ensure fisheries interests are accommodated in the multiple use of coastal zones; ensure compliance with conservation and management measures; exercise effective flag State control; cooperate through regional fishery organizations; ensure that decision making is transparent; conduct international fish trade in accordance with internationally agreed standards and instrument; cooperate to prevent disputes; promote awareness of responsible fisheries through education and training; ensure that fishing facilities are safe and healthy, and that fair working and living conditions prevail; protect the rights of fisheries and fishworkers; and promote the diversification of income and diet, through aquaculture. It would be difficult to find argument with the substance of the General Principles since in many respects they represent motherhood statements; that is, statements that are applicable to all for the general good of all. The General Principles propose actions that are deemed to be necessary to achieve responsible and sustainable resource management. However, it should be remembered that: There are no unique or correct measures to be adopted to implement the General Principles, and differences in localities and fisheries will need to be taken into account (e.g. management measures will differ between small-scale and industrial fisheries, and even for industrial and small-scale fisheries in the same region); and Disagreement could result concerning the choice of the most appropriate management measures to be employed. For example, a range of different measures is available to protect and rehabilitate critical habitats. Measures adopted range from seasonal closures of areas, where spawning takes place (i.e. a temporary/annual suspension of fishing) to permanent closures, and the designation of locations as marine protected areas (i.e. permanent suspension of fishing). The measures selected, for example, are likely to vary depending on local conditions, resource characteristics and the severity of the problems encountered.
CONCLUSION Fisheries resources should be managed in a long-term sustainable and responsible if future generations are to have access to them in the same abundance as current generations and if resource degradation is to be avoided. The Code sets out clearly defined Objectives that provide the targets that governments and stakeholders should seek to achieve through the conservation and management measures they put in place. The General Principles, in turn, provide a basis for action to achieve the Objectives and responsible outcomes. However, it should be noted that there is no unique road map for the achievement of such outcomes, and, indeed there is likely to be controversy about what route to take. Consultation with stakeholders, taking into account particular social, economic and environmental considerations is required when management arrangements are being devised for a fishery. These sometimes competing considerations should be balanced among stakeholders and the need for action to achieve sustainable solutions.
APPENDIX G 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES: BACKGROUND, PURPOSE, CONTENT AND ROLE David J. Doulman11.
ABSTRACT This paper provides a review of the background to the development of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, its purpose, content and intended role in facilitating long-term, sustainable resources use in the fisheries sector. Following background information, the paper discusses the way in which the Code was elaborated. Its purpose and objectives are then considered. The structure of the Code is outlined and global, regional and national initiatives concerning implementation addressed. The conclusion of the paper makes note of the need to focus more intensively on fisheries management, and to address past shortcomings, if fisheries are to be better managed in future and if the global contribution of fisheries to food security is to be maintained, if not increased. BACKGROUND The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in accordance with its fisheries mandate within the United Nations (UN) system, plays a pivotal role in monitoring and reporting on global developments in fisheries. In the early 1990s, as part of its so-called `watch dog' reporting, FAO brought to the attention of the international community the poor, and in some cases, declining state of a number of the world's more important and valuable fisheries. At the same time, in its reporting, FAO highlighted the fundamental role played by fisheries and aquaculture in food security and social and economic well-being. FAO also documented some improvements that had taken place in fisheries management, including some national and regional initiatives that have been adopted to promote sustainable resource-use practice.12 In 1993 FAO published its revised special chapter of The State of Food and Agriculture 1992.13 It has been noted by some commentators that this publication represented a milestone in FAO fisheries analysis. Significantly, the publication was prepared ten years after the conclusion of negotiations for the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 Convention), and in the analysis presented it was possible to reflect on global changes in the fisheries sector in the decade following the international acceptance of extended jurisdiction. At the conclusion of the negotiations for the 1982 Convention there was a widespread assumption, implicitly at least, that the formalization of the concept of extended jurisdiction in international law would lead to a substantial improvement in the way in which the world's fisheries resources were managed and utilized. 14 However, the FAO analysis, drawing together data and related fisheries information in a novel way, showed that the anticipated improvement in fisheries management had not been generally realized as a consequence of the "new-world order" in fisheries. Moreover, the FAO analysis provided, for the first time, global estimates of fish stocks that were considered to be fully.
The author is Senior Fishery Liaison Officer, Fishery Policy and Planning Division, Fisheries Department. FAO. Rome. Italy. 12 While FAO has continued to provide national technical assistance in fisheries to facilitate such improvements in management, a major component of the Organization's activities towards strengthening fisheries management in recent years has been directed at Members through the strengthening of regional fishery bodies. This focus on these bodies has been undertaken at the request of the FAO Committee on Fisheries. 13 FAO. 1993. "Marine Fisheries and Law of the Sea: A Decade of Change". FAO Fisheries Circular No. 853. FAO. Rome. 66p. 14 About 90 percent of commercial fisheries fall under national jurisdiction.
exploited, over-exploited or in a state of recovery.15 This analysis, widely quoted in the international fisheries press and literature, has become something akin to benchmark data. Since the publication of FAO's analysis, the Organization has incrementally refined, extended and modified the results as new information has become available.16 This 1991-92 FAO analysis concerning the state of world fisheries was undertaken against a background of preparations for the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). The lead-up to this Conference, and the very intensive programme of preConference negotiations, served to promote broad international awareness and concern about the manner in which many of the world's natural resources were being used. In May 1992, one month prior to UNCED, the International Conference on Responsible Fisheries was convened in Cancún, Mexico. The Conference was hosted by the Government of Mexico in collaboration with FAO. The Conference had its roots in the 1991 Nineteenth Session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) which recommended, inter alia, that the concept of responsible fisheries be developed and that an instrument to this effect be elaborated.17 The Mexican Conference adopted the Cancún Declaration, which provided input to the UNCED process and gave impetus, within FAO, to the elaboration of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. In combination, the 1991 Session of COFI, the Cancún Conference and UNCED led to the launching of three international and mutually consistent fisheries initiatives. Although somewhat different in focus and scope, each of the initiatives had similar overall goals: the long-term, sustainable use of fisheries. These initiatives involved the: convening of the 1993-95 United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995 UN Fish Stocks Conference) which led to the opening for signature in December 1995 of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement);18 1992-93 negotiation in FAO of the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (1993 FAO Compliance Agreement)19, which was adopted in November 1993 by the Twenty-seventh Session of the FAO Conference in resolution 15/93; and 1993-95 negotiation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, and its adoption by consensus in October 1995 by the FAO Conference in resolution 4/95. Whereas the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the 1992 FAO Compliance Agreement focused on high seas fisheries, the Code of Conduct addresses all fisheries and aquaculture.
This analysis was based on data for the late 1980s. However, given the changes that are believed to have taken place in some fisheries as a consequence of management initiatives, it would be prudent to undertake new analysis using a similar methodology of more recent fisheries data, using the previous results as a benchmark, to determine the changes that have in fact occurred. 16 See for example, FAO. 1995. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture;, and FAO. Rome. 57p. FAO. 1997. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. FAO. Rome. 125p. 17 This Session of COFI called for the development of new concepts which would lead to responsible, sustained fisheries. 18 The significance of the Agreement was that it consolidated certain fisheries provisions of the 1982 Convention. In particular, the Agreement elaborated, within the context of the 1982 Convention, aspects concerning the more effective conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. Moreover, the Agreement was significant in that it provided, for the first time, concrete and innovative provisions for the coordinated management of stocks occurring in zones of national jurisdiction and on the high seas, and which are the target resources for many of the world's most important and valuable commercial fisheries. However, to implement fully the Agreement there would have to be a high degree of international cooperation between coastal States and high seas fishing nations on a range of fundamental technical issues. The 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement entered into force on 11 December 2001. 19 The 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement entered into force on 24 April 2003.
Reinforcing and underscoring the importance of these international initiatives was the Rome Consensus on World Fisheries,20 adopted by the FAO Ministerial Conference on Fisheries in March 1995. Inter alia, the Consensus noted the need to take urgent action to address issues such as overfishing, the development of sustainable aquaculture and the rehabilitation of fish habitats. In addition, the Consensus urged governments and international organizations to take prompt action to effectively implement the relevant rules of international law on fisheries and related matters which were reflected in the 1982 Convention; to bring to a successful conclusion the UN Fish Stocks Conference; to complete the process for the elaboration of the FAO Code of Conduct; and for countries to ratify the FAO Compliance Agreement. ELABORATION The concept of responsible fisheries and the possibility of elaborating guidelines or a code of practice for responsible fisheries which would take into account all the technical, socio-economic and environmental factors involved, as noted above, was first mooted by the 1991 Session of COFI within the context of its deliberations on matters relating to large-scale pelagic driftnet fishing. 21 In this connection, COFI recognized that FAO had an important role to play in promoting international understanding about the responsible conduct of fishing operations and it was in this way that the concept of, and the need for, a Code of Conduct was conceived.22 At the 1993 Twentieth Session of COFI, the Committee noted that the FAO Council had endorsed the request made in the 1992 Declaration of Cancún for FAO to elaborate, in consultation with relevant international organizations, a Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. COFI agreed that such a Code would be important for achieving sustainable fisheries development. On related issues, COFI expressed satisfaction that FAO would contribute in a technical and scientific capacity to the UN Fish Stocks Conference, and the Committee agreed that the negotiation of the FAO Compliance Agreement should be kept on a fast track, while reiterating that flagging issues would be among the issues to be covered by the Code.23 The scope and the process of elaboration of the Code was a major item for discussion at the 1995 Twenty-first Session of COFI. COFI stressed the importance of the Code as an instrument that could support the implementation of the 1982 Convention and the fisheries outcomes of UNCED. The Committee also recorded its appreciation for the sound progress that had been made in the various working groups established to elaborate the Code. COFI also noted that technical guidelines would be developed by FAO to support and facilitate the Code's implementation.24 The process of the elaboration of the Code of Conduct was largely achieved through the use of openended technical working groups. All of these working groups met at FAO Headquarters in Rome.25 Open-ended groups were convened so as to encourage as wider participation as possible in the negotiation process. Recognising the financial difficulty that many developing countries encountered in participating in the work of these groups, FAO supported the participation of some countries at.
FAO. 1995. Rome Consensus on World Fisheries. FAO. Rome. 4p. FAO. 1991. FAO Fisheries Report No. 459. `Report of the Nineteenth Session of the Committee on Fisheries'. FAO. Rome. 59p. 22 Moreover, within the Committee there was wide support for FAO to convene an ad hoc technical consultation on high seas fishing prior to the 1993 Session of COFI, while noting that FAO was cooperating with the United Nations Office for Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea (UNOALOS) on an expert meeting to be held in New York in July 1991 concerning the Implementation of the Legal Regime for High Seas Fisheries under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The FAO consultation on high seas fishing was subsequently held in Rome in September 1992. 23 FAO. 1993. FAO Fisheries Report No. 488. `Report of the Twentieth Session of the Committee on Fisheries'. FAO. Rome. 77p. 24 FAO. 1995. FAO Fisheries Report No. 524. `Report of the Twenty-first Session of the Committee on Fisheries'. FAO. Rome. 61p. 25 While all the working groups were held at FAO Headquarters in Rome, FAO did avail itself of the opportunity to convene briefing sessions for countries and non-governmental organizations in New York at UN Headquarters when Sessions of the UN Fish Stocks Conference were in progress.
meetings with a view to maintaining a regional representation and balance. 26 Moreover, in the elaboration process close relations between FAO and a number of international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were encouraged. Many of these NGOs made sustained and important technical contributions to the elaboration process. This participation and transparency was highly appreciated both by FAO Members and the international NGO community. Following the negotiation of the Code, the FAO Conference unanimously adopted it in October 1995.27 In so doing the Conference made a broad international call to all stakeholders in the fisheries sector, including both FAO and non-FAO Members, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs, industry and fishermen to collaborate in the fulfilment and implementation of the Code's objectives and principles. At the 1997 Twenty-second Session of COFI, the Code was addressed as a substantive item. In considering this item the Committee focused, to a significant extent, on securing funding to support the implementation of the Code in developing countries and on monitoring and reporting on its implementation. With regard to these matters COFI agreed that progress reports should be presented to the Committee every session. These reports would address achievements and progress with implementation. Governments would be requested to provide information to FAO on progress with national implementation through the use of a self-assessment questionnaire to be developed by the Secretariat.28 This information would then be incorporated into a consolidated report to the Committee. In keeping with this request from COFI, detailed reports were provided to the Committee at the Twenty-third, the Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth Sessions in 1999, 2001 and 2003 respectively. The reports focussed on steps being taken by FAO Members, regional fishery bodies and NGOs in implementing the Code of Conduct. Constraints to implementation were also identified and possible solutions to those constraints proposed. These implementational reports, in addition to permitting FAO and the international community gauge the extent and scope of implementation, provide a basis for the international donor community to assess development assistance needs by region and to channel assistance more effectively to activities and areas identified by potential recipient countries. PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES The Code of Conduct takes cognisance of the state of world fisheries and aquaculture, and proposes actions towards implementing fundamental changes within the fisheries sector to encourage the more rational and sustainable utilization of fisheries and aquaculture. The rationale underlying the Code is the notion that structural adjustment within the fisheries sector is essential if long-term goals of sustainability are to be achieved. Moreover, the Code recognizes that while policy decisions concerning the changes aimed at achieving sustainability rest firmly with governments, the effective implementation of the Code requires wide stakeholder participation and cooperation (i.e. from fishermen, processors, national and international NGOs to consumers).
During the negotiation process, specific local, national, sub-regional and global issues were diluted, or perhaps even avoided in the negotiation process, with a view to finding acceptable global compromises, and ultimately consensus, on a wide range of difficult and controversial issues. Therefore, when considering the implementation of the Code, which must be geared to meet particular national circumstances and requirements, adaptation is likely to be needed in many instances. However, it must be stressed that such adaptations should not violate the letter or spirit of the Code. 27 The Conference resolution adopting the Code also referred to a number of other important international fisheries agreements and initiatives, including the 1982 Convention, the 1992 Declaration of Cancún, the 1992 Rio Declaration and Agenda 21, the 1993 Compliance Agreement, the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement,27 and the 1995 Rome Consensus on World Fisheries. Article 3 of the Code requires that it be interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with these instruments, all of which seek to achieve rational and sustainable fisheries. 28 FAO. 1997. FAO Fisheries Report No. 562. `Report of the Twenty-second Session of the Committee on Fisheries'. FAO. Rome. 32p. The questionnaire has been pre-tested at Session of FAO's regional fishery bodies prior to it being distributed to Members for completion. The information provided to FAO by countries will form the basis for reporting to COFI.
Article 2 of the Code summarizes its objectives. These are to: establish principles, in accordance with the relevant rules of international law, for responsible fishing and fisheries activities, taking into account all their relevant biological, technological, economic, social, environmental and commercial aspects; establish principles and criteria for the elaboration and implementation of national policies for responsible conservation of fisheries resources/fisheries management and development; serve as an instrument of reference to help States to establish or to improve the legal and institutional framework required for the exercise of responsible fisheries and in the formulation and implementation of appropriate measures; provide guidance which may be used where appropriate in the formulation and implementation of international agreements and other legal instruments, both binding and voluntary; facilitate and promote technical, financial and other cooperation in conservation of fisheries resources and fisheries management and development; promote the contribution of fisheries to food security and food quality, giving priority to the nutritional needs of local communities; promote protection of living aquatic resources and their environments and coastal areas; promote the trade of fish and fishery products in conformity with relevant international rules and avoid the use of measures that constitute hidden barriers to such trade; promote research on fisheries as well as on associated ecosystems and relevant environmental factors, and provide standards of conduct for all persons involved in the fisheries sector. These objectives underpin, and indeed provide the general framework for, the Code's General Principles in Article 6 and the ensuing substantive or thematic articles (Articles 7 to 12). STRUCTURE The Code of Conduct is a voluntary instrument. This means that it does not have to be formally accepted by governments in the same way as the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement. The Code's scope is broad and comprehensive. It prescribes principles and standards for the conservation and management of all fisheries, and addresses the capture, processing and trade in fish and fishery products, fishing operations, aquaculture, fisheries research and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. In total, the Code has 12 articles and two annexes. Articles 1 to 5 cover, respectively, the nature and scope of the Code, objectives, relationship with other international instruments, implementation, monitoring and updating, and the special requirements of developing countries. Significantly, in Article 4, COFI is designated as the body to monitor the implementation of the Code. Moreover, through its appropriate bodies, and taking account of reports to COFI concerning the Code's implementation, provision exists for FAO, through COFI, to revise the Code. This possibility ensures that the Code remains a living document, capable of being adapted and modified to meet new fisheries developments and situations as they evolve. The substantive or thematic articles of the Code are found Articles 6 to 12. These articles address: Article 6 General Principles; Article 7 Fisheries Management; Article 8 Fishing Operations; Article 9 Aquaculture Development; Article 10 Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management; Article 11 Post-harvest Practices and Trade; and Article 12 Fisheries Research.
The Code's two annexes provide background to the origin and elaboration of the Code and the text of FAO Conference resolution 4/95 concerning the adoption of the Code. Resolution 4/95 of the FAO Conference, recalling Article 5 of the Code, urged that the special requirements of developing countries be taken into account in implementing its provisions. The resolution also requested FAO to elaborate an inter-regional programme for external assistance for these countries. 29 The purpose of this programme would target the upgrading of developing countries' capabilities so that they would be better placed to meet their obligations under the Code. International plans of action Four international plans of action (IPOAs) have been concluded within the framework of the Code of Conduct. These IPOAs focus attention on specific issues that the international community has deemed to be of importance in achieving long term sustainability. Like the Code, the IPOAs are voluntary in nature. They address: incidental catch of seabirds in longline fisheries; conservation and management of sharks; management of fishing capacity; and prevention, deterrence and elimination of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. Unlike the Code, not all of the IPOAs are universally applicable. For example, countries that do not have longline fisheries are unlikely to have seabird and shark interaction problems. Furthermore, these interaction problems are not global in nature; longline fisheries in tropical areas are unlikely to interact with seabirds since such interactions are normally confined to temperate areas. Governments should therefore assess the applicability of the IPOAs and, as appropriate, take action to develop and implement national plans of action (NPAs), as called for in the relevant IPOAs, to address national needs. The IPOAs focusing on the management of fishing capacity and IUU fishing have implications for most countries in both small-scale and industrial fisheries. Assessments are needed to determine the extent and gravity of capacity and IUU fishing problems and the development of NPAs. Each IPOA sets a target date for countries to implement their NPAs. These dates, plus the severity of the problems associated with fishing capacity and IUU fishing, should facilitate priorities for action in implementing the NPAs. 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement The 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement is an integral component of the Code. 30 However, the Agreement has different legal status to that of the Code in that the Agreement is a legally binding international instrument. The purpose of the Compliance Agreement is to provide an instrument for countries to take effective action, consistent with international law, to deter the reflagging of vessels by their nationals as a means of avoiding compliance with applicable conservation and management rules for fishing activities on the high seas. In its Preamble, the Agreement notes that the practice of flagging and reflagging fishing vessels as a means of avoiding compliance with international conservation and management measures for living marine resources, and the failure of flag States to fulfil their responsibilities with respect to fishing vessels entitled to fly their flag, are among the factors that.
This request was met through FAO elaborating the Interregional Programme of Assistance to Developing countries for the Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Parts of this Programme are being implemented by FAO's FISHCODE. 30 See Preamble to the Agreement.
seriously undermine the effectiveness of such measures.31 Indeed, it is the failure of countries to fulfil these flag responsibilities that has led to the widespread practice of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. This type of fishing has been high on the international fisheries agenda over the past five years because of the effects it has on undermining the effective management of fish stocks. In practice, the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement seeks to ensure that there is effective flag State control over fishing vessels operating on the high seas. This would require, inter alia, that Parties to the Agreement maintain a register of vessels to fish on the high seas and that all vessels engaged in such fishing operations are authorized to do so. Moreover, the Agreement requires that certain records concerning the physical characteristics of the vessels and their ownership and operational details, be maintained by the Parties are part of their flag State responsibilities. Furthermore, Parties are obligated to exchange information maintained on their respective registers through FAO and other appropriate global, regional and subregional fisheries organizations. Even before its entry into force some of the elements of the Compliance Agreement were already being adopted by countries and incorporated into their fisheries legislation when it was being revised and other policy changes implemented concerning national authorizations for vessels to fish on the high seas. IMPLEMENTATION FAO has a responsibility to facilitate the implementation of the Code and, where possible and appropriate, to technically support national and regional initiatives towards this end. However, primary responsibility for the Code's implementation rests with governments since it involves difficult, and sometimes sensitive, national policy decisions. Obviously, FAO is not in a position undertake such decisions but it can provide technical advice to countries as to what might be the best decisions to take in their particular circumstances to implement the Code of Conduct. FAO's global initiatives FAO has a central role to promote the implementation of the Code. Supporting national and regional implementation initiatives is and important part of the work of the Fisheries Department. Many of these initiatives are related. Some of FAO's activities include: the broad dissemination of the Code;32 the development of four international plans of action, within the framework of the Code, addressing seabirds, fishing capacity, sharks and IUU fishing; the publication and dissemination of simple language versions of the Code and some of the technical guidelines; the implementation of the Code has been placed on the agendas of all FAO and some nonFAO regional fishery bodies for consideration and follow-up action. In this way awareness about the importance of the Code and the need to promote and facilitate its implementation has been heightened. In addition, FAO staff routinely promote the implementation of the Code when country visits are undertaken; the elaboration and distribution of technical guidelines to assist with the national implementation of the Code; training input for the development of a course for the TRAIN-SEA-COAST initiative; a CD-ROM and video concerning the Code; the mounting of regional workshops to assist in awareness building about the Code;.
The articles of the Agreement cover definitions, application, flag State responsibility, records of fishing vessels, international cooperation, exchange of information, cooperation with developing countries, non-parties, settlement of disputes, acceptance, entry into force, reservations, amendments, withdrawal, duties of the depository and authentic texts. 32 In addition to the five official FAO languages, the Code is available in about 40 languages in total.
an inter-regional programme called FISHCODE to support activities relating to the implementation of the Code. The Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme, which focuses on the countries of West Africa, seeks to promote the implementation of the Code; the monitoring of progress with the Code's implementation and reporting to COFI, and a Internet site for the Code has been established on the FAO Page on the web. Regional action At the regional level, fishery bodies have an important role to play in facilitating the implementation of the Code. It is recognized that some aspects of the Code can be more effectively implemented in some areas and in some fisheries through collective regional action. Moreover, it is further recognized that in regions where there are shared fisheries and fleets or common management problems in nonshared fisheries, regional cooperation as expressed through the coordination of management policies and other forms of cooperation (e.g. sharing of training and research institutes and other forms of technical cooperation) can be best achieved through the programmes of RFBs. For these reasons FAO seeks to collaborate with regional fishery bodies to foster the Code's implementation. National responsibility With respect to the implementation of the Code at national level, governments are encouraged to work with all stakeholders to facilitate the necessary structural adjustment and change in the fisheries sector. In large-scale fisheries, industry will have a prominent role in implementing the Code; this role will essentially involve ensuring that industry compiles voluntarily with measures adopted by governments to facilitate the long-term, sustainable use of fisheries. Such compliance will reduce government enforcement costs in achieving sustainability goals. In contrast, in artisanal and small-scale fisheries, the fishing communities themselves (through community-based management) and possibly NGOs (given their grass-roots fisheries connections in many developing countries), will be expected to be closely involved in facilitating and supporting the implementation of the Code. Outcomes FAO, and indeed Article 4.4 of the Code, acknowledge that the implementation of the Code requires concerted and coherent action and cooperation by all stakeholders. However, rapid adjustment and change in fisheries, as a consequence of steps taken to implement the Code, are unlikely to result, nor indeed are they to be expected. Rather, progress towards implementation and the benefits generated from responsible policies and measures adopted by governments to facilitate sustainability are more likely to yield phased and incremental results. A fundamental concept underlying the implementation of the Code is the assumption that governments want better managed and sustainable fisheries and that they are prepared to take politically unpopular and difficult decisions, in the short-term, as a means of attaining longer-term beneficial gains. 33 However, this notion is perhaps somewhat naive, since most governments have short planning and policy horizons. Under these constraints, governments seek to minimize social and economic disruption through their policy interventions, even when it is recognised that such intervention is necessary to achieve sustainable practices. For this reason, technical advice concerning fisheries management and the policy decisions taken by governments concerning management (e.g. the imposition of certain input and output controls) often fail to intermesh. This is also why the implementation of management measures, or the modification of existing management approaches, usually tends to yield incremental results unless a fishery is very seriously depleted or collapses.
It should be recognized that decisions concerning fisheries management are inherently political and socio-economically difficult. The bottom line in fisheries management is that the exclusion principle must be applied (i.e., not all those persons who desire to fish can be accommodated in a fishery because of physical resource constraints) and in any activity where exclusion is necessary, the activity associated with it assumes a high political profile. This problem, however, must be addressed if fisheries governance, generally, is to be improved.
Having regard for the practical difficulties associated with the sustainable management of fisheries it is none-the-less important to note the major contribution made by the sector to global food security. Indeed, in some communities and regions, and among some groups of countries (e.g. communities around large inland lakes and in small island developing States), fish constitutes, by a wide margin, the most significant source of animal protein for human consumption. In this connexion, one of the major challenges in fisheries management facing all countries is how to implement measures that will permit overexploited stocks to be rebuilt in a reasonable period of time and to concurrently ensure that optimally, underexploited or unexploited stocks do not become overfished. A fine balancing of policies and management measures is required to achieve such an objective. However, if globally successful these policies should enable the aggregate contribution of fish to food security to be maintained, if not increased.34 The goals and principles of the Code of Conduct are intrinsically linked to this food security challenge.35 CONCLUSION The poor state of many of the world's major fish stocks, ineffective national and regional management practices and the need to facilitate long-term sustainable fisheries led to the adoption of the Code in 1995. Briefly stated, its purpose is to facilitate structural adjustment and change in the fisheries sector to: ensure sustainable utilization of resources, and maintain the global contribution of fisheries to food security. However, analyses by FAO and other organizations have demonstrated that many of the world's fish stocks are not subject to effective and coherent management. This situation, while not only having implications for the erosion of the resource base in the longer term also negatively impacts the current and future contribution of fisheries to food security. In the post-UNCED period there has been heightened international attention concerning the need to implement sustainable practices in all fisheries. In an unprecedented way countries, both individually and in regional groupings, have been called upon to focus more intensively on the implementation on rational management measures. Certain shortcomings have been highlighted, including the lack of flag State responsibility, vessel reflagging to avoid legitimate fisheries conservation and management measures, a growing incidence IUU fishing and weak monitoring, control and surveillance of fleets. Countries through a range of national and international initiatives have been called upon to address these and other management deficiencies. To this end countries have been encouraged, inter alia, to: take account of, and to apply, new and innovative approaches to management; broaden participation in the management process by involving all stockholders; foster greater international cooperation where fisheries resources are shared, including more effective participation in the work of regional fishery bodies, and accept, as soon as possible, international fishery instruments open for signature and ratification so as to bring them into effect without delay.
Linked to the objective of maintaining/increasing the contribution of fish to food security is the need to consider access to fish by the poorest segments of the population. A related is the issue concerns the proportion of fish fit for human consumption actually going directly to human consumption as opposed to other purposes (e.g. the production of fishmeal to support the production of farmed products for the upper end of the market). While the production of high value products maybe important economically, such products may not make a substantial contribution to food security for those who are most in need and vulnerable to food insecurity. 35 The Kyoto Declaration and Plan of Action, adopted by the International Conference on the Sustainable Contribution of Fisheries to Food Security (Kyoto, Japan, 4-9 December 1995) refers to the need to effectively apply the Code of Conduct in the interests of maintaining the contribution of fisheries to food security. Moreover, the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action, adopted at the World Food Summit (Rome, Italy, 13-17 November 1996) calls for the early implementation of the Code to address responsible and sustainable utilization and conservation of fisheries resources in order to optimise the long-term sustainable contribution of fisheries to food security.
Reaching agreement on the text of the Code of Conduct during the negotiation process was not always an easy task; the accommodation of different positions in a negotiation process requires good faith by all parties and a willingness to compromise to reach reasonable and practical outcomes. However, since 1995 the real challenge for countries is to devise appropriate policies and to implement measures to give effect to the Code that are inclusive in nature by involving all stakeholders. In essence, this challenge requires taking the general principles and provisions of the substantive articles of the Code and translating them into actions that will facilitate the changes required to yield long-term sustainable results.
APPENDIX H LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES AND RELATED INTERNATIONAL PLANS OF ACTION Blaise Kuemlangan36.
ABSTRACT The Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the related international plans of actions (IPOAs) are voluntary. This means that they are not legally binding and are meant to facilitate, inter alia, the implementation of other binding fisheries instruments, namely the Law of the Sea Convention, the UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the Compliance Agreement. However the measures outlined in these voluntary instruments may have significant legislative implications. The fact that the Code is now referred to in many multilateral and bilateral agreements increases this prospect. The most meaningful way in legislatively implementing the Code is to use it as a reference document in developing legislative provisions for fisheries legal frameworks. However, this should not discourage the implementation of the Code and the other voluntary instruments by non legislative means. Much can be achieved through informal arrangements for implementation of the Code. What is important is to begin the process of adapting the Code and the IPOAs to the needs of the State for application within national jurisdiction. INTRODUCTION This paper discusses the legal implications of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (the Code) and related International Plans of Action (IPOAs) relating to the conservation and management of fisheries. It also points out the legislative action required to implement the Code, the 1993 Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (the Compliance Agreement) as an integral part of the Code, and the IPOAs, particularly the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU). It has been stressed that the Code and IPOAs are voluntary instruments. That is, they are non binding or do not lead to any legal obligations. It may seem ironic therefore to be discussing or even suggest that there are legal implications of voluntary and non binding instruments. The truth is that there are indeed legal implications of these instruments even if they are themselves not biding in nature due to the fact that these instruments do not exist or intended to be applied in isolation. They were established in the context of established principles of international law and binding agreements concerning fisheries conservation and management. Indeed, they are, in many instances, intended to fill in the gaps in the pre-existing rules on fisheries conservation and management with the objective of facilitating the effective implementation of those binding rules.37 In this context, there exists a complex web of relationships between the voluntary instruments and the binding ones which need to be taken into consideration in the more important task of implementation of fisheries conservation and management directives that these instruments contain.
Legal Officer, Development Law Service, FAO Legal Office, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy. The views expressed in this paper are personal and do not necessarily reflect the views of FAO. 37 For instance, the Code in article 2 (d) states: "the objectives of the Code are to ... provide guidance which may be used where appropriate in the formulation and implementation of the international agreements and other legal instruments, both binding and voluntary.".
Further, in the world of international law making and undertakings, States subjects of international law, and not individuals, have the ability to enter into relationships with other States and make State-level commitments. Whatever commitments entered into, whether binding or not, do not affect individuals although it may be stated in a State-level instrument that it also applies to individuals.38 It follows therefore that if it is desired that individuals take certain actions, the international commitments should be translated into national action plans and directives. Most of these national directives take the form of legislated policy so that they are enforceable. That these would, at legislation stage, have legal obligations is therefore obvious. NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE INSTRUMENTS The Code The Code explicitly draws attention to its relationship with other binding international instruments and its scope. In this respect, the relevant and much cited provisions of the Code are Article 1, Nature and Scope, and Article 3, Relationship with other International Instruments. The important excerpts from these provisions are restated below: "1.1 The Code is voluntary. However, certain parts of it are based on relevant rules of international law. ....The code also contains provisions that may be or have provisions that may be or have already been given binding effect by means of other obligatory legal instruments amongst the Parties, such as the Agreement to promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the high Seas, 1993 which ... forms an integral part of the Code." "3.1 The Code is to be interpreted and applied in conformity with international the relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982. Nothing in this Code prejudices the rights, jurisdiction and duties of States under international law as reflected in the Convention. 3.2 The Code is also to be interpreted and applied: (a) in a manner consistent with the relevant provisions of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks; (b) in accordance with applicable rules of international law including the respective obligations of States pursuant to international agreements to which they are party; and, (c) in the light of the 1992 Declaration of Cancun, the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, and Agenda 21 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), in particular Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, and other relevant declarations and international instruments." As regards the extent of its application, the Code "is global in scope and is directed toward members and non-members of FAO, fishing entities, sub-regional, regional and global organizations .... and all persons concerned with the conservation of fisheries resources and management and development of fisheries".39 Thus the immediate legal considerations concerning the Code are that:.
For example Article 1.2 of the Code. The Code Article 1, paragraph 1.2.
certain provisions of the Code have binding effect for all States if such provisions reflect international law. certain provisions of the Code have binding effect for certain States only if the provision reflects a term of an existing binding agreement and such States are parties to that agreement. all other provisions of the Code are voluntary until a State, in applying the Code, formulates a term of the Code into a binding requirement particularly through national legislation for application within its national jurisdiction. It is also possible that a State, with other States could convert a voluntary provision of the Code into a binding commitment through bilateral or multilateral agreement. The Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries40 formulated largely to help guide implementation of the Code are also voluntary. Certain guidelines, suggest the making of regulations at the national and regional level to implement the Code. To that extent, those technical guidelines would have legislative implications. The Compliance Agreement The purpose of the Compliance Agreement is to reinforce the effectiveness of international fisheries conservation and management measures. It does this by redefining and reinforcing in a number of specific ways the concept of flag State responsibility for the activities of fishing vessels flying the flag of a State Party. It also seeks to provide means to ensure the free flow of information on all high seas fishing operations. The Compliance Agreement was initially conceived as an instrument to close a legal loophole in regional and species fisheries arrangements whereby fishing vessels could change their state of registration ("reflag") in order to evade or avoid the obligations of such arrangement.41 In the context of the Code, the Compliance agreement is, as stipulated under Article 1.1, an integral part of the Code. The IPOAs The International Plans of Actions relating to fisheries established under the auspices of FAO are also voluntary. These IPOAs are: the International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries, the International Plan of Action for Conservation and Management of Sharks, the International Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity and the IPOA-IUU. The IPOAs were negotiated within the context of Article 2 (d) of the Code in that they provide guidance which may be used where appropriate in the formulation and implementation of the international agreements and other legal instruments. The IPOA-IUU in particular states that it is "elaborated within the framework of the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries as envisaged under Article 2 (d)".
The Technical Guidelines are on: Fishing Operations, supplement to Fishing Operations on Vessel Monitoring Systems; the Precautionary Approach to Capture Fisheries and Species Introduction; the Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management; Fisheries Management, supplement to Fisheries Management on Conservation and Management of Sharks and on Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries; Aquaculture Development, supplement to Aquaculture Development on Good Aquaculture Feed Management Practice; Inland Fisheries; Responsible Fish Utilization; Indicators for Sustainable Development of Marine Capture Fisheries; Implementation of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal Unreported and Unregulated Fisheries. 41 In its first versions, the Agreement was meant to deal directly with the act of re-flagging, by providing "that parties to the agreement should refuse to register fishing vessels unless they had sufficient grounds to believe that the vessel would `not be used to undermine the effectiveness of internationally agreed conservation and management measures." It soon became clear however, that general consent would not be reached on any such agreement and for this reason, the primary focus of the draft agreement was changed from the legal act of flagging and vessel registration to the act of authorizing a vessel to fish on the high seas." Gerald Moore, "The Food and Agriculture Organization Compliance Agreement" (1995) 10 International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 412-416 at 412.
Like the Code, the IPOAs are not intended to give rise to any legally binding obligations. This is apparent from drafting style (the "verbose essay style" of drafting), the use of non-mandatory language (e.g. the use of "should" instead of "shall"), the general context in which the negotiations of the texts took place, and other means such as that they do not require formal acts of acceptance by States, they are not structured like internationally binding instruments and there are no provisions on signature, entry into force or other standard final clauses as are common of binding instruments.42 As is evident from the text, the context of negotiations and declarations made at the adoption of the text, the negotiators of the IPOA-IUU in particular went out of their way, perhaps unnecessarily, to underscore the voluntary nature of the IPOA and that it does not prejudice their rights and obligations under international law and other relevant agreements.43 LEGISLATIVE IMPLICATIONS OF THE CODE, THE COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT AND THE IPOA-IUU The inherent value of the Code, the Technical Guidelines and the IPOAs is in their objectives, which should be kept in mind in implementation. Many of the actions elaborated in these instruments are specific enough so as to be implemented directly. Other prescribed actions require other prerequisite action or that institutional infrastructure be put in place so that the prescribed actions can be effected. The Code and the IPOA-IUU, specifically directs that specific legislative provisions or frameworks for specific purposes should be established. In other instances, these instruments require that for a specific action to be established, the legal framework or legislative action should be among the matters to be considered if that specific action were to be pursued. This section examines and presents the legislative implication of the Code, the Compliance Agreement and IPOA-IUU. It should be noted that while it is a possibility, enacting legislation or the promulgation of regulations to effect action should not always be the preferred national implementation response to the Code and the IPOAs. This is because by incorporating their provisions in legislation, the required actions stipulated in the Code and other voluntary instruments once legislated, would become legally binding if mandatory language is used. It is important therefore to ensure that non mandatory language is used in drafting language if certain actions (for example principles) are put in legislation only to draw attention to them or to give them emphasis. Much can be achieved without legislation, through calls to undertake voluntary action by way of national plans of action, policy statements, national voluntary codes of practice and other non binding instruments. Legislative implications of the Code The provisions of the Code identified herein are only those that explicitly refer to the need for legislative action or where it is considered that legislative action could provide realistic opportunity for implementation. However, there are instances where national legislative practices have used certain provisions of the Code as inspiration for legislative texts even if these provisions do not prescribe legislative action. Such provisions would be highlighted where appropriate. The general role of legal frameworks in implementation of the Code While it has been mentioned that legislation is not the only means by which the Code can be implemented, it is evident that the Code itself recognises the important role of national laws and regulations comprising the legal framework concerning fisheries (including aquaculture) management, as an integral part of the implementation approach for the Code. The fact that one of the objectives of the Code, as stipulated under Article 2 (c), is to "serve as an instrument to help States to establish or improve legal frameworks required for the exercise of responsible fisheries", underscores the important role that legal frameworks play in conservation and management efforts.
See William Edeson, The International Plan of Action on Illegal Unreported and Unregulated Fishing: The Legal Context of a Non-Legally Binding Instrument, International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, Vol 16, No. 4, 603­623 at page 608. 43 See William Edeson ibid.
This significant role is further emphasized in Article 7.1 which requires that "appropriate policy, legal and institutional frameworks to pursue the goal of long term conservation and sustainable use of fisheries resources" should be established. The importance of appropriate legal framework to facilitate the pursuance of the Code's objectives is restated again in article 7.7.1, article 8.3.1 (in respect of Port State duties), article 9.1.1 (in respect of facilitating responsible aquaculture) and article 10.1.1 (in respect of integration of fisheries in coastal area management). This specific role, once stated as an objective of fisheries management legislation, provides the fundamental basis for general implementation of the Code as well as the specific activities required for the pursuance of the Code's objectives. Specific legislative implications of the Code The other provisions of the Code with specific or implied legislative implications are articles: 6.13, relating to ensuring that decision making processes are transparent and achieve timely solutions to urgent matters, and facilitating consultation and the effective participation of industry, fish workers, environmental and other interested organizations in decision making, and the development of laws and policies related to fisheries management, development, international lending and aid; 7.6.2, concerning the adoption of measures to ensure that no vessel is allowed to fish without authorization and in a manner consistent with international law or in conformity with national legislation within areas of national jurisdiction; 7.6.6, which provides for the need to give due recognition, as appropriate, to the traditional practices, needs and interests of indigenous people and local fishing communities which are highly dependent on fishery resources for their livelihood, in deciding on the use, conservation and management of fisheries resources; 7.7.2, concerning the need to ensure that sanctions applicable in respect of violations are adequate in severity to be effective, including sanctions which allow for the refusal, withdrawal or suspension of authorizations to fish in the event of non-compliance with conservation and management measures in force; 7.7.3, regarding the implementation of effective fisheries monitoring, control, surveillance (MCS) and law enforcement measures including, where appropriate, observer programmes, inspection schemes and vessel monitoring systems and that such measures should be promoted and, where appropriate, implemented by subregional or regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements (RFMOs); 8.1.8, relating to the need to maintain records of fishers which should, whenever possible, contain information on their service and qualifications, including certificates of competency; 8.2.4, in respect of the need to ensure that fishing gear should be marked in accordance with prescribed specifications in order that the owner of the gear can be identified and that such marking requirements should take into account uniform and internationally recognizable gear marking systems; 8.2.6, regarding the ratification and implementation of the Compliance Agreement and to adopt laws and regulations consistent with the provisions of the Agreement; 8.2.7, concerning the need for Flag States to take enforcement measures in respect of fishing vessels entitled to fly their flag which have been found by them to have contravened applicable conservation and management measures, including, where appropriate, making the contravention of such measures an offence. Sanctions applicable in respect of violations should be adequate in severity to be effective in securing compliance and to discourage violations and should deprive offenders of the benefits accruing from their illegal activities. Such sanctions may, for serious violations, include provisions for the refusal, withdrawal or suspension of the authorization to fish;.
8.3.1, relating to the need to for Port States to take such measures as are necessary to achieve and to assist other States in achieving the objectives of the Code, and to make known to other States details of regulations and measures they have established for this purpose. When taking such measures a port State should not discriminate in form or in fact against the vessels of any other State; 8.3.2, concerning the need for Port States to provide such assistance to flag States as is appropriate, when a fishing vessel is voluntarily in a port or at an offshore terminal of the port State and the flag State of the vessel requests the port State for assistance in respect of non- compliance with subregional, regional or global conservation and management measures or with internationally agreed minimum standards for the prevention of pollution and for safety, health and conditions of work on board fishing vessels; 8.5.1, concerning: the need to ensure that fishing gear, methods and practices, to the extent practicable, are sufficiently selective so as to minimize waste, discards, catch of non-target species, both fish and non-fish species, and impacts on associated or dependent species and that the intent of related regulations is not circumvented by technical devices; and, in this regard, need for the fishers to cooperate in the development of selective fishing gear and methods and that information on new developments and requirements is made available to all fishers; 8.5.2, regarding the need take into account the range of selective fishing gear, methods and strategies available to the industry when drawing up laws and regulations in order to improve selectivity; 8.7.1, in respect of the need to introduce and enforce laws and regulations based on the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL 73/78); 9.1.1, concerning the need to establish, maintain and develop an appropriate legal and administrative framework to facilitate the development of responsible aquaculture; 10.1.1, which requires States to ensure that an appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework is adopted to achieve the sustainable and integrated use of the resources, taking into account the fragility of coastal ecosystems and the finite nature of their natural resources and the needs of coastal communities; 10.1.3, regarding the need to determine the possible uses of coastal resources and to govern access to them taking into account the rights of coastal fishing communities and their customary practices to the extent compatible with sustainable development; 10.2.5, relating to the need to promote multi-disciplinary research in support of coastal area management; 11.1.12, concerning the need to ensure that environmental effects of post-harvest activities are considered in the development of related laws, regulations and policies without creating any market distortions; 11.3.1, relating to the need for laws, regulations and administrative procedures applicable to international trade in fish and fishery products to be transparent, as simple as possible, comprehensible and, when appropriate, based on scientific evidence; 11.3.2, which requires facilitation of appropriate consultation with and participation of industry as well as environmental and consumer groups in the development and implementation of laws and regulations related to trade in fish and fishery products; 11.3.3, concerning the need to simplify laws, regulations and administrative procedures applicable to trade in fish and fishery products without jeopardizing their effectiveness; 11.3.4, which requires: States, in introducing changes to legal requirements affecting trade in fish and fishery products with other States, to allow sufficient information and time for other States and producers affected to introduce, as appropriate, the changes needed in their processes and procedures; and, in this connection, to allow consultation with affected States on the time frame for implementation of the changes and that due consideration be given to requests from developing countries for temporary derogations from obligations;.
11.3.5, regarding the need for periodical review of laws and regulations applicable to international trade in fish and fishery products in order to determine whether the conditions which gave rise to their introduction continue to exist; and, 12.14, which provides that there should be compliance with laws and regulations and international law in the conduct of scientific research activities in waters under the jurisdiction of another State. As the Compliance Agreement is an integral part of the Code, provisions of the Code which reflect the requirements of the Compliance Agreement would in some instances, need to be implemented by State parties to the Agreement through national legislation even if such provisions do no explicitly require this. The same is true with the provisions of the Code which reflect international law and other Agreements, in particular the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. Of particular interest is current States practice relating to the article 6 - General Principles. As can be seen from the text of this article, its prevailing nature is that it is a statement of principles or fundamental considerations that should be the basis for specific national action for sound conservation and management of fisheries resources. The nature of the article is its very attraction. Many States have adapted article 6 and incorporated it into national legislation as statement of principles to guide interpretation or implementation of national laws or a reference for specific conservation and management measures. It this way, the principles have become legislated policy but non necessarily binding requirements for many States. In the Pacific, such statement of principles in legislation can be found in the Fisheries Act of Solomon Islands, the Fisheries Management Act of Papua New Guinea, the Fisheries Management Act of Marshall Islands, the Fisheries Management Act of Nauru and the Fisheries Management Act of Tonga. This is a good example of legislating provisions of the Code which gives its principles high profile desired while avoiding the difficulty of having to undertake complicated drafting to translate the utopian objectives of Article 6 into specific action. The Compliance Agreement It should be recalled that with respect to binding instruments such as the Compliance Agreement, only States as subjects are obliged to implement it if they are parties to that Agreement. For common law countries such as the island countries of the Pacific, the legal obligation of States under international binding agreements can only be binding on individuals if there is enabling national legislation in place. It should be noted however that States, if they so wish, may implement an international agreement even if they are not parties to the Agreement. The provisions of the Compliance Agreement with legislative implications44 are as follows: Art. III - Flag State Responsibility (1) (a) This paragraph requires each party to take necessary measures to ensure that its vessels do not undermine the effectiveness of international measures. This could be complied with by, inter alia, recognizing international measures and an authorization for vessels to fish on the high seas, subject to appropriate conditions, sanctions for violation of the conditions and the power to suspend or cancel the licence.
See also Law and sustainable development since Rio, Legal trends in agriculture and natural resource management, FAO Legislative Study 73, Rome 2002. For a further reading into implementation of the Compliance Agreement in national legislation, see William Edeson, David Freestone and Elly Gudmundsdottir, Legislating for Sustainable Fisheries: A Guide to Implementing the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement, The World Bank Law, Justice and Development Series, Washington, D.C.
(2) This paragraph requires parties to prohibit fishing on the high seas by their vessels without authorization and requires the authorized vessel to fish in accordance with the conditions of the authorization. This could be complied with by requiring an authorization, imposing appropriate conditions, applying sanctions for violation of the conditions and being able to suspend or cancel the licence. (3) This paragraph requires parties to be able to exercise effective control over their vessels. In order to ensure that vessels that cannot be controlled are not registered in areas under national jurisdiction, consultation with the authority responsible for vessel registration and licensing is necessary before a fishing vessel is registered or licensed. (4) This paragraph provides that the authorisation is deemed cancelled when the vessel ceases to fly the party's flag. This seems to derive directly from the agreement and may not require national action but it could be restated if it is desirable. (5) This paragraph requires parties to refuse an authorisation to reflagged vessels that have had an authorisation cancelled or suspended for undermining international management measures, subject to various conditions. (6) This paragraph requires that vessels be marked according to generally accepted standards, such as the FAO Standard Specifications for the Marking and Identification of Fishing Vessels. The State needs to ensure that legislation fully incorporates FAO standards. (7) This paragraph requires vessels to supply information on area, catches and landings. Provisions for reporting, plus general provisions for authorisation, conditions and regulations, would allow this to be implemented. (8) This paragraph requires enforcement measures including refusal, suspension or withdrawal of the authorisation. Art. IV - Records of Fishing Vessels This article requires records of authorised vessels, which may be accomplished through legislative provision if it does not already exist. Art. V - International Cooperation (1) The parties are required to exchange information including evidence.
(2) This paragraph requires parties to notify the flag state where a vessel in port has undermined an international management measure. No legislation is needed although it could be restated if it is desirable. This paragraph also provides for parties to arrange for port state investigations. In any case, it would appear that a port state may inspect fishing vessels. Art. VI - Exchange of Information This article provides for supply of information to FAO. Legislation may not be necessary, although it has been legislated in some jurisdictions. Licence application provisions could be amplified to request additional information (previous registration number, previous flag, "moulded depth" [if "practicable"]).
The IPOA-IUU The IPOA-IUU was conceived to, as is stated in its name, prevent deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. 45 It does this by providing all States, within its terms, comprehensive, effective and transparent measures by which to act. These measures shall be applied, taking into consideration the special requirements of developing countries and respecting the principles of participation and coordination, phased implementation, comprehensive and integrated approach, conservation, transparency and non-discrimination.46 The IPOA-IUU is said to be probably the most important global instrument concerning fisheries since 1995 when both the Code and the UN Fish Stocks Agreement were finalized.47 Due to the nature of the IPOA-IUU (i.e. dealing with largely illegitimate activity), it should come as no surprise that most of the measures set out under the IPOA-IUU would have to be facilitated by national laws and regulations. Most of the groups of measures under Part IV (implementing international instruments, exercising State control over nationals, dealing with vessels without nationality, imposing sanctions for IUU fishing and dealing with IUU fishing by non-cooperating states and MCS), would need implementation through national legislation. The same is true for implementing flag state responsibilities relating to fishing vessel registration, keeping records of fishing vessels, authorizations to fish, coastal State responsibilities and port States measures. The FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries 9, Implementation of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU Technical Guidelines) provides a comprehensive guide to implement the IPOA-IUU including what needs to be provided in national legislation which should be referred to by any national legislative review process. It suffices for the purposes of this paper to refer to the recommendation in the IPOA-IUU Technical Guidelines relating to national laws, regulations and practice that "[a]t any early stage in the implementation of the IPOA-IUU, each State should undertake a thorough review of its national laws, regulations and practices relating to IUU fishing."48 The review should consider such questions as:.
For the purposes of the IPOA-IUU: "3.1 Illegal fishing refers to activities: 3.1.1 conducted by national or foreign vessels in waters under national jurisdiction of a State, without the permission of that State, or in contravention of its laws and regulations; 3.1.2 conducted by vessels flying the flag of States that are parties to a relevant regional fisheries management organization but operate in contravention of the conservation and management measures adopted by that organization and by which the States are bound, or relevant provisions of the applicable international law; or 3.1.3 in violation of national laws or international obligations, including those undertaken by cooperating states to a relevant fisheries management organization. 3.2 Unreported fishing refers to fishing activities: 3.2.1 which have not been reported, or have been misreported, to the relevant national authority, in contravention of national laws and regulations; or 3.2.2 undertaken in the area of competence of a relevant regional fisheries management organization which have not been reported, or have been misreported, in contravention of the reporting procedures of that organization. 3..3 Unregulated fishing refers to fishing activities: 3.3.1 in the area of application of a relevant regional fisheries management organization that are conducted by vessels without nationality, or by those flying the flag of a State not party to that organization, or by a fishing entity, in a manner that is not consistent with or contravenes the conservation and management measures of that organization; or 3.3.2 in areas or for fish stocks in relation to which there are no applicable conservation and management measures and where such fishing activities are conducted in a manner inconsistent with State responsibilities for the conservation of living marine resources under international law." 46 See paragraphs 8 to 9.6 of the IPOA-IUU. 47 William Edeson, supra note 6 at page 603. 48 IPOA-IUU Technical Guidelines at page 11.
For all states, is any additional legislative or regulatory authority necessary or desirable to implement the IPOA? Are existing penalties for IUU fishing of sufficient severity to prevent deter and eliminate such fishing by vessels flying your flag and/or operating in areas under your jurisdiction? For all States, does your domestic law give effect to obligations you have assumed under international law, including through your participation in RFMOs? For flag States, are the laws, regulations and practices relating to fishing vessels flying your flag on the high seas and in areas under the jurisdiction of other States sufficient to prevent deter and eliminate IUU fishing by those vessels? Do your laws regulations and practices provide an adequate basis for monitoring such fishing activity on the high seas, for apprehending IUU fishers and for imposing penalties on them? For coastal States, are the laws, regulations and practices relating to fishing by vessels in areas under your jurisdiction sufficient to combat IUU fishing by those vessels? If you allow foreign vessels to fish in areas under your jurisdiction, do the agreements providing for such access need to be strengthened to address problems of IUU fishing? For port States, are your laws, regulations and practices relating to the landings or transshipment of fish in your ports sufficient to ensure that such fish are not the product of IUU fishing? For States involved in international trade in fish and fishery products, are your laws, regulations and practices sufficient to implement internationally agreed market-related measures designed to prevent deter and eliminate IUU fishing? To the above could be added the considerations, including legislative options for strengthening State control over nationals also set out in the IPOA-IUU Technical guidelines.49 In relation to reviewing national legislation to implement the IPOA-IUU measures on MCS, the questions to be asked in the review for strengthening national legislation relevant to MCS contained in Annex C of FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 41550 are also relevant. CONCLUSION The above review certainly reveal that while the Code and the IPOAs are meant to be voluntary and meant to facilitate implementation of binding instruments, the measures outlined in these voluntary instruments may have significant legislative implications. The fact that the Code is now referred to in many binding international instruments increases this prospect.51 However, this should not discourage the implementation of the Code and the other voluntary instruments by non legislative means. Much can be achieved through informal arrangements for implementation of the Code. What is important is to begin the process of adapting the Code and the IPOAs to the needs of the State for application within national jurisdiction. This implies, as has been stated with respect to the Code, "a phased assessment ­ Analysis ­ Action ­ process through which the provisions of the Code are set in context of the specific conditions of a region, sub-region, country, locality or fisheries." Such a process involves "a review of the state of the fisheries, including initiatives that influence or are likely to impact on the sector, a study of the provisions of the Code, the identification of the pertinent issues and constraints, and the elaboration of strategies and (Action plan) to address the issues and constraints."52.
IPOA-IUU Technical Guidelines at pages 13 ­ 14. Recent trends in monitoring, control and surveillance systems for capture fisheries, FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 415, Rome 2003 at page 141. 51 See William Edeson, Towards long-term Sustainable Use: Some Recent Development in the Legal Regime of Fisheries, In International Law and Sustainable Development, Past Achievements and Future Challenges, Eds. Alan Boyle and David Freestone, Oxford University Press, 1999. 52 B Satia, The Concept, Rationale and Process for the Adaptation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, FAO Rome, paper presented at the West African Regional Workshop on the Adaptation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in West Africa, held in Cotonou, Benin, 1-5 June 1998.
APPENDIX I THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS Barbara Hanchard 53.
ABSTRACT The development of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries was fundamentally a global response to the progressively failing state of many of fisheries the world over. The Code provides the global community with a framework of principles, goals and elements for action with which to implement responsible fisheries policies and legislation based on conservation, management and development of living marine resources, taking into account the ecosystem and biodiversity. The Code covers principles and standards not only for the conservation and management of fisheries per se but also all aspects of fisheries including capture, processing and trade of fish and fishery products, fishing operations, aquaculture, fisheries research and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. This paper is divided into two sections. The first provides a brief overview of the Code itself and its development. The second section presents the developments in fisheries management in the western and central Pacific, which give effect to the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and other international fisheries agreements that provide principles and international standards for the conservation, management and development of living aquatic resources in the region. This section focuses on the fisheries management initiatives in the region which have been developed consistent with the principles that the Code of Conduct, and other international instruments but does not include comment on other provisions in the Code such as those relating to aquaculture development, integration of fisheries into coastal area management, post harvest practices and trade and fisheries research. OVERVIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT Fisheries activities have since early times been a major food source for the world's population and have provided employment and economic benefits to fishers worldwide. In recent years it has become clear that while fisheries resources are considered renewable, they are not infinite and need to be responsibly managed if future generations are to benefit in a similar manner as those today enjoy. Clear signs of over-exploitation of major fish stocks, modifications to ecosystems, significant economic losses, and international conflicts on management and fish trade, have up until the late 1980s significantly threatened the long-term sustainability of fisheries and the contribution of fisheries to food supply. Many of the worlds fisheries are considered fully exploited, over-exploited, depleted or in need of recovery and are affected by environmental degradation. At the beginning of the 1990s it was recognized that new approaches to fisheries management needed to be urgently developed which would take into consideration conservation, and environmental, as well as social and economic aspects of fisheries. This included the recognition that fisheries on the high seas also presented a challenge for effective fisheries management. The nineteenth session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) held in March 1991 called for new concepts that would lead to.
Forum Fisheries Agency, Honiara, Solomon Islands. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author. They do not necessarily reflect the views of the Members of the Forum Fisheries Agency or FAO.
responsible fisheries and the development of a Code of Conduct to foster its application. The International Conference on Responsible Fisheries held in Cancun, Mexico in 1992 reinforced the need to develop an international Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and resulted in a Declaration54 that expressed among other things: The vital need for fishing to continue and develop within a comprehensive and balanced system under the concept of "responsible fishing"; and That this concept encompasses the sustainable utilization of fisheries resources in harmony with the environment...........". The Cancun meeting resulted in the agreement that FAO would be responsible for drafting an international Code of Conduct, which took into account all the matters on responsible fishing expressed in the resulting Declaration. Subsequently, the outcomes from the Cancun meeting, including the Declaration, provided an important contribution to the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), otherwise known as the "Earth Summit" held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. From the Earth Summit, Agenda 2155 of the Rio Declaration provides a comprehensive global plan of action and sets out the principles for sustainable management, with the underpinning premise that, environmental protection constitutes an integral part of the development process for the use of renewable resources. Importantly for fisheries management, Chapter 17 of the plan of action (Agenda 21), "sets forth rights and obligations of States and provides the international basis upon which to pursue the protection and sustainable development of the marine and coastal environment and its resources." The programme of action in Chapter 17 and in other sections of Agenda 21 provides the basis for long-term sustainable management, including the precautionary approach56. This agenda is responsible for the inclusion of these concepts in a number of other international instruments. The Rio Declaration also takes into account the special needs and environmental vulnerability of developing countries and least developed countries. In according them special priority, the global community recognized that the ability of developing countries to fulfill the objectives set out in the plan of action is dependent upon their capabilities, including financial, scientific and technological means at their disposal. Further the Declaration specifies that support will be needed to enhance developing countries capacities to participate effectively in the conservation and sustainable use of marine living resources, both under their jurisdictions and on the high seas. Over the last two decades a number of developments in fisheries have resulted in outcomes, which reflect common agreements about the sustainable use of the worlds aquatic marine resources. Some of which are mentioned above. Figure 1 depicts a time sequence of significant developments relating to responsible fisheries, including the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct.
http://www.oceanlaw.net is a website which provides an Internet guide to International Fisheries Law including resolutions and declarations and other non-binding fisheries instruments. 55 http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/agenda21.htm 56 Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development states that, "In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.".
S ig n ific a n t conferences and outcom e s relating to the developm e n t of responsible fisheries.
1 9 7 0 's In tro d u c tio n of EEZs.
U n ite d Nations Convention on Law of the Sea 1982.
L a te 1980's recognition that fisheries resources were threatened by over exploitation and uncontrolled development.
1 9 th COFI in 1991.
c a l l e d for new concepts that would lead to responsible fisheries.
International Conference on Responsible Fisheries 1 9 9 2 , Cancun, Mexico.
R e q u e s t for an International Code of Conduct.
D e c la ra tio n of Cancun (1 9 9 2 ).
U n ite d Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) 1 9 9 2 , Rio de Janerio.
A g e n d a 21 Chapter 17 (1 9 9 2 ).
2 7 th FAO Conference.
F A O Compliance Agreement (N o v 1993).
F A O Conference, 1995.
F A O Code of Conduct (O c t 1995).
U n i te d Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks Multilateral High Level Conference for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the W e s te rn and Central Pacific R e y k ja v ik Conference on Responsible Fisheries in the Marine Ecosystem (2 0 0 1 ).
U N Fish Stock Agreement (1 9 9 5 ).
W e s te rn and Central Pacific Fisheries Convention (2 0 0 0 ).
R e y k ja v ik Declaration (2 0 0 1 ).
WHAT THE CODE IS TRYING TO ACHIEVE The overall objective57 of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries is "responsible fisheries" and those considered responsible are all those concerned with the fisheries sector such as governments, fishers, processors, consumers and other stakeholders58. The Code reinforces the moral obligation of those engaged in fisheries to behave in a responsible manner. This ensures effective conservation and management of living aquatic resources. Fisheries stakeholders must now be answerable and accountable not only for the biological aspects of fisheries but also the technological, economic, social, environmental and commercial aspects as well. Although the Code is not binding in international law, it has become an important reference point for giving practical application to the concept of responsible fishing. Therefore it still is to be interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with relevant rules of international law such as the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (LOSC). Also some parts are replicated in legal binding instruments such as the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, 1993 and more specifically the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UN Fish Stocks Agreement). Similar to the Rio Declaration, the Code recognizes the limitations of developing countries to implement effective conservation and management schemes consistent with the Code's objectives and principles. Article 5 of the Code makes provision for relevant established organizations and institutions to, "give full recognition to the special circumstances and requirements of developing States, including in particular the least developed among them, and small island developing countries." Further, Article 5 also provides that, "States, relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and financial institutions should work for the adoption of measures to address the needs of developing countries, especially in the areas of financial and technical assistance, technology transfer, training and scientific cooperation and in enhancing their ability to develop their own fisheries as well as to participate in high seas fisheries, including access to such fisheries." The core principles of the Code aim to promote responsible fishing in a broad manner by seeking to: maintain the quality, diversity and availability of fishery resources for present and future generations; prevent overfishing and excess fishing capacity; ensure the conservation of not only target species but also associated and dependent species belonging to the same ecosystem; prevent the degradation of fisheries habitats in marine and fresh water ecosystems with attention to the integration in coastal zone management; ensure that in the absence of best scientific information, the application of the precautionary approach is imperative;.
The objectives of the Code are set out in Article.
Article 1.2 ­ The Code is global in scope, and is directed toward members and non-members of FAO, fishing entities, subregional, regional and global organizations, whether governmental or non-governmental, and all persons concerned with the conservation of fishery resources and management and development of fisheries, such as fishers, those engaged in processing and marketing of fish and fishery products and other users of the aquatic environment in relation to fisheries.
eliminate the use of non-selective and environmentally unsound fishing gear; promote the research and the collection of data in order to improve fisheries knowledge; encourage States to employ effective control over vessels that fly their flag; facilitate effective participation by all stakeholders in decision-making in relation to determining conservation and management policies and laws; make the trade of fish and fisheries products consistent with relevant international agreements, including the World Trade Organisation Agreement and should not result in environmental degradation or negative social impacts; maintain safe and healthy fisheries work environments and food quality controls in the processing and distribution of fisheries products; and consider aquaculture and culture-based fisheries with minimal environmental impacts as a diversification for income and diet. FAO has also produced a series of technical guides with which to facilitate the practical application of the principles of the Code and a number of International Plans of Action addressing specific issues of fisheries management concerns: on illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing, incidental catch of seabirds in the longline fishery, fishing capacity and the conservation and management of sharks. The plans of action are for all intents and purposes considered part and parcel of the Code in that they serve to ensure responsible fisheries on fisheries specific issues. Article 7 of the Code outlines the principles and concepts of fisheries management. It requires States and all those involved in fisheries management to establish appropriate policy, legal and institutional frameworks with which to put in place measures which will ensure the long term sustainable use of the fisheries resources. These measures must be based on the best scientific advice so that optimum utilization occurs, at the same time the resources are maintained for present and future generations. The following section discusses the selective application in the western and central Pacific of fisheries management initiatives and arrangements that are consistent with the principles set out in the Code. While the Code encompasses responsible fishing with regard to all living marine resources, the remaining discussion in the context of the western and central Pacific relates mainly to the measures and arrangements both currently in place and in the process of being developed for the region's tuna resources. THE APPLICATION OF CONCEPTS FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHING IN THE WESTERN AND CENTRAL PACIFIC The Code of Conduct is a complex and comprehensive approach to fishing that will be challenging to implement for many involved in the world's fisheries. The principles of the Code are the new norms of responsible fishing and because of their complexity and the varying capacity amongst States, comprehensive application cannot be expected to be simultaneous. The implementation of the measures to promote responsible fishing is a major challenge for most countries and in the western and central Pacific this is particularly so for the small island developing States for which resources and capacity are limited. However, a significant advantage in the Pacific region is that, not withstanding national interests, regional cooperation in the fisheries sector is well developed. This is evident in the establishment and participation of a number of regional organizations that work collectively on fisheries resource issues for Pacific member countries. For this purpose, the Secretariat for the Pacific Community (SPC), Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) work in partnership with their membership to strengthen the capacity of Pacific Island members to manage their own fisheries resources and marine environments. Well developed cooperation and coordination in the fisheries sector is also evident in the number of regional and sub-regional fisheries management agreements that are in place in the Pacific region, details of which will be discussed later in this section.
Tuna resources of the Western and Central Pacific It is widely recognized that fish and fishing, particularly the tuna fishery, are very important to the people of the Pacific islands, certainly in terms of nutrition, culture, national revenues and employment. Tuna resources in the western and central Pacific are considered to support the largest sustainable tuna fishery in the world with a landed catch averaging over a million metric tonnes per annum and the most significant fishery economically in the Pacific region. The Pacific region tuna fishery supplies a third of the all the world's tuna and 60 per cent of all canned tuna. The key commercial tuna stocks are skipjack (Katsuwonus pelamis), yellowfin (Thunnus albacares), bigeye (Thunnus obesus) and South Pacific albacore (Thunnus alalunga). With the exception of bigeye and yellowfin for which there is some doubt, the stocks are considered to be healthy. The annual value of the catch is currently estimated to be US $1.9 billion (Gillet, McCoy, Rodwell and Tamate, 2001). Fees for foreign access to fish for tuna in the EEZs of Pacific island countries was estimated in 1999 to be US $60.3 million. These returns are often crucial components of government revenues, particularly for the smaller countries such as Kiribati and Tuvalu, which have few natural resources other than tuna. Tuna has both significant economic and nutritional importance to the region. The dependence of Pacific countries on the tuna resources as food supply is notable, with tuna making up a substantial proportion of all fish consumed in the region. It forms a substantial part of artisanal and subsistence fisheries, and in terms of volume is the most important fish taken in small scale fisheries in the Pacific according to Gillett et al. (2001). The contribution of tuna to the food security of the region is enormous. Another important economic benefit from the tuna resources to Pacific island countries is the fact that most formal employment in Pacific fisheries is tuna related59. Fisheries management in the Western and Central Pacific The Convention that established the FFA60 was concluded in July 1979 and was a response by Pacific Island sovereign States to challenges faced as a result of the extension of the maritime jurisdictions under LOS. The extension of the maritime zone to 200 miles placed management and conservation obligations on Pacific Island States and required them to manage the tuna resources in these zones in a responsible manner. Although Pacific Island countries decided at the time of formation to confine membership of the FFA to members of the South Pacific Forum and other territories in the region on approval, they have always recognised the requirement to cooperate with distant water fishing nations (DWFNs) operating in the region61, either directly or through an appropriate international organization as an obligation required by the LOS; an obligation which has also since been reinforced in the UN Fish Stock Agreement. By establishing the FFA, Pacific Island States have long since recognised their obligations to ensure the conservation of living marine resources in zones under their jurisdiction and their sovereign rights to manage, explore and exploit those resources. The role and work of the FFA supports responsible fisheries. The objectives of the FFA as a whole works towards consultation and coordination with regards to harmonising policies on fisheries management, relations with foreign fishing partners, surveillance and enforcement, onshore fish processing, marketing and cooperation in respect of access to the EEZs of other Parties.
Gillett et al. (2001) estimate that tuna related direct and indirect employment accounts for between 21 ­ 31, 000 jobs or between 5 ­ 8 % of all waged employment in the Pacific region. 60 The FFA membership consists of Australia*, Cook Islands*, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji*, Kiribati*, Marshall Islands*, Nauru*, New Zealand*, Niue*, Palau*, Papua New Guinea*, Samoa*, Solomon Islands*, Tokelau, Tonga*, Tuvalu and Vanuatu*. FFA consists of the Forum Fisheries Committee (FFC) and a support Secretariat based in Honiara, Solomon Islands. * Indicates FFA members who also members of FAO. 61 FFA Convention, Article III (2) "....recognises that effective cooperation for the conservation and optimum utilisation of the highly migratory species of the region will require the establishment of additional international machinery to provide cooperation between all coastal States in the region and all States involved in the harvesting of such resources.".
The FFA Convention places significant emphasis on science and information based management in that there is a requirement to: (a) collect, analyse, evaluate and disseminate to Parties relevant statistical and biological information with respect to the living marine resources of the region and in particular the highly migratory species; collect and disseminate to Parties relevant information concerning management procedures, legislation and agreements adopted by other countries both within and beyond the region; collect and disseminate to Parties relevant information on prices, shipping, processing and marketing of fish and fish products; provide, on request, to any Party, technical advice and information; assistance in the development of fisheries policies and negotiations; and assistance in the issue of licences, the collection of fees or in matters pertaining to surveillance and enforcement; and seek to establish working arrangements with relevant regional and international organizations, particularly the South Pacific Commission.
The industrial harvest of the tuna resources in the Pacific region is dominated by the fleets of DWFNs that, fish both on the high seas and in the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of Pacific Island countries under access agreements. Over the years developing States in the Pacific region have been able to coordinate and harmonize fairly successfully their access arrangements with DWFNs that target tuna in their EEZs. There are varying degrees of tuna related fishing activity across the Pacific region and the industrial catch is traditionally taken by the fishing methods of purse seining, longlining and to a lesser degree by pole-and-line vessels. The purse seine fishery is concentrated in the western part of the Pacific region and occurs mainly in the EEZs of a number of Pacific countries, which have formalized their association as a sub regional group resulting in the Nauru Agreement. The Parties to the Nauru Agreement 62 , and the founding instrument itself, is exemplary of efforts in the Pacific region to coordinate and harmonize the management of common fisheries with elements of responsible fishing. There are also a number of other regional adopted instruments that, one, display the level of coordination in fisheries management across the Pacific region exists, and two, implement significant aspects of the Code of Conduct in the Pacific region. Generally, the purposes of these instruments are to strengthen the conservation and management of shared fisheries in the region and to facilitate the development of arrangements that ensure long-term sustainable fisheries. Regional instruments for the management of shared fisheries63 Nauru Agreement The Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest (the Nauru Agreement) was signed in February 1982. The signatories to this agreement are commonly known as PNA (Parties to the Nauru Agreement) and the membership includes, Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu. In the collective EEZs of this sub group of FFA members, a large proportion of the region's tuna stocks 64 can be found and historically these countries recognised the need to consolidate their.
Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Republic of Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu. 63 Annexes 1 and 2 provide a list of full names of regional and international fisheries instruments and the status of regional and internal instruments amongst the FFA member countries.
approaches to arrangements with their DWFNs partners. The PNA has for the past two decades sought to coordinate management measures with regard to common fisheries stocks for greater economic benefit. In this way regional cooperation has been able to facilitate reasonable financial returns from their access agreements with DWFN partners for the PNA countries. Through their agreement, the PNA countries have established Harmonised Terms and Conditions for access by DWFNs to their zones and granted preferential access to vessels of the Parties so as to encourage domestic fishing industries. Policies and approaches developed within the PNA group such as the Minimum Terms and Conditions (MTCs)65 for access have gained over the years broader acceptance and endorsement in the region by the total FFA membership. The regional Harmonised Terms and Conditions for Foreign Fishing Vessel Access are on occasion amended by the Forum Fisheries Committee (FFC) to take into account developments in management measures in the region. The Code of Conduct reaffirms the use of the best scientific evidence available when making decisions about conservation and management measures for fishery resources and calls for the timely, complete and reliable collection of statistics on catch and fishing effort (Article 7.4.4). Tsamenyi (2002) concludes that the Nauru Agreement and its implementing Arrangements provide a framework to generate information and implement procedures in support of science-based responsible fishing. The Agreement also establishes procedures for the exchange and analysis of information relating to vessel specifications and fleet composition in addition to catch and effort by fishing vessels.66 In a recent review of the Nauru Agreement, the Parties have decided to take steps towards improving the robustness of the instrument. The Parties now seek to develop and adopt an additional implementing arrangement with which to establish new terms and conditions for access by fishing States as a way of ensuring compliance with the new more sophisticated Western and Central Pacific Tuna Convention (this will be discussed in full later in the paper) and also be applicable to domestic vessels. By extending the existing minimum terms and conditions of access to domestic vessels, an attempt is being made to ensure compatibility (especially in catch reporting) within the convention area. While the aims and principles of the Nauru Agreement are still pertinent, consideration is being given to amending this Agreement to reflect broader management objectives including issues related to conservation and resource sustainability. Wellington Convention This regional Convention came into effect when large-scale pelagic driftnet fishing by the fleets of Japan, Korea and Taiwan in the mid to late 1980s became an issue and at the same time responded to international concern about the impact of these types of nets. The regional fleets concerned would fish with driftnets of up to 60km in some instances, in a non-selective manner and with an unknown impact on both the marine environment and the fish stocks. By giving effect to this Convention, the region recognized the need to exercise precaution and the ban on the use of driftnets. This can be considered an early example of the precautionary approach to fishing as advocated in the Code of Conduct and other international instruments. The 1991 Convention for the Prohibition of Fishing with Long Driftnets in the South Pacific (Wellington Convention) was signed in November 1989 and came into force in May 1991 binding its signatories into placing a moratorium on the use of driftnets in the Convention area defined in the instrument. Parties to this agreement undertook to:.
In 1999, 98% of the tuna catch taken from the EEZs of Pacific island FFA members was produced by PNA countries, primarily from PNG, FSM and Kiribati. PNA also accounted for 94% of the access fees paid to the FFA Pacific island states. (Gillett et al 2001). 65 These are set out in Implementing Arrangements I & II of the Nauru Agreement and represent international best practice before 1992 ­ 1995, the era in which the principles of responsible fishing became conretized and gained rapid international acceptance according to Tsaymeni, (2002). 66 Article IV.
prevent their nationals and vessels from using driftnets, prevent drift netting in areas under their jurisdiction; prohibit the transhipment, landing, processing, importation of catch caught with driftnets; prohibit the possession of driftnets in their jurisdictions and restrict port access and facilities to driftnet vessels. The Convention has two supporting protocols. These also provide for procedures that are consistent with responsible fishing, including the development of conservation and management measures for South Pacific albacore tuna within the Convention area67 Niue Treaty The 1992 Niue Treaty on Cooperation in Fisheries Surveillance and Law Enforcement in the South Pacific Region (Niue Treaty) was opened for signature in July 1992 and entered into force in May 1993. Although it has no direct reference to science based aspects of responsible fishing, the Niue Treaty does promote intra regional coordination and cooperation in fisheries surveillance and law enforcement and represents international best practice with respect to monitoring control and surveillance. The purpose of the Treaty is to coordinate and cooperate in matters of monitoring, control and surveillance. Parties to this Treaty have agreed to develop regionally agreed procedures for the conduct of fisheries surveillance and law enforcement and cooperate in the enforcement of their fisheries laws and regulations. In this regard the Parties to this Treaty have agreed to: general cooperation and consultation; cooperate in the implementation of the regional Harmonised Minimum Terms and Conditions; exchange information relevant to the Treaty (e.g. foreign fishing vessel details); cooperate in fisheries surveillance and law enforcement; and cooperate in prosecution and enforcement of penalties; Of note, within this Treaty is the provision (Article VII) by Subsidiary Agreement for Parties to exchange physical platforms (personnel and the use of vessels and aircrafts) for effective law enforcement. Provided a Subsidiary Agreement is in place, illegal fishing in EEZ of one Party can be pursued into the EEZ of another and the offending vessel operators prosecuted in the legal systems of the reciprocal Parties to the Subsidiary Agreement. The Treaty provides a great opportunity for small Pacific island States to pool resources to improve MCS in the region, reduce illegal fishing and exchange information to make control measures effective. However, to date only one Subsidiary Agreement has been signed, that between the Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands and Palau. Palau Arrangement Having entered into force in November 1995, the 1992 Palau Arrangement for the Management of Purse Seine Fisheries in the Western Pacific (Palau Arrangement) was first opened for signature in October 1992. The entry into force of the Palau Arrangement was dependent upon the signatures of Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea and Kiribati, along with two others. This was because a large proportion of the purse seine activity and catch occurs in the EEZs of these three countries. This is still relevant today, as mentioned before in 1999, 98 per cent of the tuna caught in.
Protocol I, Article 4.
the region was in the EEZs of PNA countries. Of this 70 per cent was taken in the EEZs of Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea and Kiribati (Gillet et al, 2001). Other Parties to this Arrangement also include Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu. The Arrangement provides for the needs of PNA and is principally to facilitate formal cooperation relating to the number of licenses issued to purse seine vessels by individual fleet that are allowed to fish in the EEZs of PNA countries. It is a prescriptive means to restrict the number of purse seiners operating in the region and currently imposes a ceiling of 205 vessels. Substantial progress is being made to amend the Arrangement to implement a system of allocating total fishing days to the Parties so each Party will be free to licence whom they wish within a limit of the total days available. This mechanism will help regulate the amount of effort as measured by fishing days applied to the purse seine fishery. The substantive provisions of this Arrangement are to do with licensing allocations and monitoring control and surveillance arrangements consistent with responsible fisheries. However, the Arrangement focuses more on allocating resources between and amongst the Parties and according to recent studies, the Arrangement should use science and information based approaches. With this in mind there is no reference in the Agreement to the use of science and information based methods. Despite this aspect of the Agreement the broad principles of responsible fishing are enshrined in the preamble as follows: "RECOGNIZING that in order to ensure sustained conservation of living resources both within and beyond the exclusive economic zone, fisheries management regimes must effectively maintain the ecological relationship between dependent and associated populations, prevent any decrease in the size of the harvested populations below those necessary to ensure their stable recruitment, and avoid adverse impacts upon the marine environment and further recognizing that in order to ensure conservation and promote optimum utilization of living resources fishing must be carried out only on the basis of ecologically sound practices, effectively monitored and enforced;" Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement The 1994 Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement for Regional Access commonly known as the FSM Arrangement, entered into force in September 1995 thirty days after receipt of the final signatures of Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea and Kiribati. The Arrangement was opened for signature in November 1994. The Parties to this Arrangement also include Marshall Islands, Nauru, Solomon Islands and Palau. The Arrangement allows preferential access to the EEZs of the Parties for genuine domestic vessels of the Parties. The administrator, which is the Director of FFA, keeps a Register of Eligible Fishing Vessels and once vessels are on the register they are entitled to make an application for a FSM Arrangement fishing licence. This entitles the licence holder to be able to fish in the Arrangement area, which is defined as the EEZs or fisheries zones of the Parties but excludes specified closed areas. The primary objective of the FSM Arrangement is to secure maximum sustainable economic benefits from the tuna resources for the Parties. It also encourages greater participation by nationals of the Parties in the fishery, and the development of domestic fishing industries. A comprehensive licensing regime is employed in this Arrangement, which also sets out criteria for eligibility based on a minimum points system that vessels must comply with. Eligibility criteria are based on equity, local operations involved, vessel flagging, local purchases, onshore investment, and nationals of the Parties employed either on fishing vessels or in the local enterprise.
Science based information for management purposes are not explicit in the FSM Arrangement but there is scope for its inclusion in future review processes. Tuna is the only fish that can be taken using these licences, but allowances are made for incidental by-catch associated with the fishery. Although there is an absence of science based management instructions, the FSM Arrangement does provide a well-tailored system of control for the eligible vessels and in this regard supports responsible fishing. Links within the FSM Arrangement are made with both features of the MTCs as stated in the Nauru Agreement and the possibility of joint surveillance as prescribed in the Niue Treaty. An important feature of this system of control is the provision made for Port State Enforcement in which port inspections of documents and catch can be carried out. In recent years, the Arrangement has become an attractive means of securing a licence for those vessels that cannot be licensed within the framework of the Palau Arrangement. This has posed a number of problems regarding the genuineness of the vessels that are using the FSM Arrangement licences as a means to seek preferential access. To help combat this a task force review strongly supported the use of a process of an independent review of vessels where there is some doubt as to whether the criteria for eligibility are being met or not. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Convention In legal terms the 2000 Convention for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (Tuna Convention) can be characterised as part of the process of progressive development of international law within the framework of the 1982 LOSC and its implementing agreement the 1995 UN Fish Stock Agreement. According to Aqorau (2001), the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Convention (WCPTC) represents a new threshold in international tuna management as it builds on the principles in the Fish Stocks Agreement. One of the last major fisheries 68 not subject to international regulation, is the tuna fishery in the western and central Pacific. This will change now that the WCPTC has been concluded and arrangements become fully operational. The coastal FFA States initiated in 1994 the Multilateral High Level Conferences (MHLC69), which were a process of negotiation with other States that have an interest in the region's tuna fishery and cumulated in the conclusion of the WCPTC in September 2000 at Hawaii. New Zealand is the depository for this Convention and to date all FFA members are signatories with the exception of Kiribati, Papua New Guinea and Tokelau70, although Papua New Guinea has ratified the Convention with four other FFA members. The Western and Central Pacific Tuna Convention's objective is to ensure, through effective management, the long-term conservation and sustainable use of highly migratory fish stocks in the western and central Pacific Ocean in accordance with the 1982 LOSC and the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. The major principles and measures71 of the WCPT Convention include: adoption of measures to ensure long-term sustainability of highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area and promote their optimum utilization;.
The eastern tropical Pacific has since the 1950's been regulated by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC). In the Atlantic, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna (ICCAT) have been involved in tuna management since the 1960s and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) was established in 1996 under the auspices of FAO. http://www.fao.org/fi/body/rbf/index.htm 69 Multilateral High Level Conference on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific (1994 ­ 2000) brought together Pacific coastal States and other States with and interest in the fishery, to establish a mechanism for conservation and management of the relevant stocks in the region. 70 Tokelau is a territory of New Zealand and as such is not a Contracting Party to WCPTC. Similar situations apply to American Samoa (USA), French Polynesia (France), Guam (USA), New Caledonia (France), Northern Mariana Islands (USA) and Wallis and Futuna (France). However, provisions are made within the WCPTC for participation of the territories in the work of the WCPT Commission, the nature and extent of which is to be the subject of a separate set of rules of procedures. 71 Refer to Article 5: Principles and measures for conservation and management of the WCPTC.
ensuring that such measures are based on the best scientific evidence available and are designed to maintain or restore stocks at levels capable of producing maximum sustainable yield, as qualified by relevant environmental and economic factors. This includes the special requirements of developing States in the Convention Area, particularly small island developing States, and takes into account fishing patterns, the interdependence of stocks and any generally recommended international minimum standards, whether subregional, regional or global; application of the precautionary approach in accordance with the Convention and all relevant internationally agreed standards and recommended practices and procedures; assessing the impacts of fishing, other human activities and environmental factors on target stocks, non-targeted species, the species belonging to the same eco-system or dependent upon or associated with the target stocks; adopting measures to minimize waste, discards, catch by lost or abandoned gear, pollution originating from fishing vessels, catch of non-target species and non-fish species, (hereinafter referred to as "non-target species") and impacts on associated or dependent species, in particular endangered species, and development of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear and techniques; protection of the biodiversity of the marine environment. take measures to prevent or eliminate over-fishing and excess fishing capacity and to ensure that levels of fishing effort do not exceed those commensurate with the sustainable use of fishery resources; take into account the interests of artisanal and subsistence fishers; collect and share, in a timely manner, complete and accurate data concerning fishing activities on, inter alia, vessel position, catch of target and non-target species and fishing effort, as well as information from national and international research programmes; and implement and enforce conservation and management measures through effective monitoring, control and surveillance. The WCPTC obligates parties to the Convention to apply the guidelines for the precautionary approach as set out in the UN Fish Stocks Agreement but places the onus on the Parties to the Convention rather than the Commission72 to apply the principles of the precautionary approach. Participation in the WCPTC presents many challenges for Pacific Island coastal States. This Convention and other relevant international instruments recognise that the responsibilities that come with responsible fishing are extremely great and that in many cases may be beyond the capacities of the Pacific Island States acting alone. The WCPTC has application to all species of highly migratory fish stocks (except sauries) across their range, which takes into account both the high seas areas and those under national jurisdiction. However, there are areas of the WCPTC, which are open to interpretation including the competence that the Commission will have in regulating EEZs at the moment. This will have implications for the implementation of allocation measures for total allowable catches, particularly if you consider the principle that coastal States have the sovereign right over fisheries resources in their EEZs. This issue and other areas of ambiguity will no doubt be addressed as the mechanism for the fisheries management arrangement in the western and central Pacific becomes fully operational. As acknowledged by Aqorau (2001), "the conclusion of the WCPTC is only the beginning of new challenges for Pacific Island States. Its implementation, however, should augur well for the health of the tuna resources in the region.".
The WCPTC provides for the establishment of a Commission with an international legal personality and such legal capacity as may be necessary to perform its functions and achieve its objects (Article 9). The venue for the headquarters of the Commission is yet to be decided although the FFA members have endorsed a single candidate of Federated States of Micronesia.
Other considerations, including compliance mechanisms in the Western and Central Pacific in support of responsible fisheries A number of other considerations in place in the western and central Pacific lend weight to the emerging concepts of responsible fisheries. The previously mentioned, regionally accepted MTCs have on occasion been updated, as recently as May 2003, to better reflect current operating conditions and requirements imposed by Pacific coastal States on DWFNs. Recent improvements include the requirement for foreign fishing vessels seeking access to the EEZs of FFA members to be in good standing on both the Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels and the FFA member's Vessel Monitoring System (FFA VMS) Register, both of which are administered by the FFA Secretariat. Other amendments include: an updated by-catch definition; vessel reporting requirements and the need to provide landing and out-turn documentation; in relation to observers, the requirement for licensing countries to achieve no less than 20 per cent coverage of foreign vessels fishing in their zones; the requirement to take measures through legislation and regulation to exercise Port State enforcement; further provide the requirement to clearly mark and identify fish aggregating devices and determine where it is deployed; and the issuing of fishing licences dependent upon compulsory pre-fishing inspections. These regionally accepted standards for access are on the whole implemented and used in all access agreements that FFA countries enter into. The Code of Conduct in Article 7.1.7 of the general provision for fisheries management provides that "States should establish, within their respective competences and capacities effective mechanisms for fisheries monitoring, surveillance, control and enforcement to ensure compliance with their conservation and management measures......." A number of regional compliance arrangements have long been established in the western and central Pacific with some success. It remains to be seen the degree of which the existing arrangements will be absorbed by the broader management arrangements required for the new Commission and the high seas areas under its management. The following are descriptions of registers and observer programmes operating in the region. Regional Register of fishing vessels The South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels has been in place since 1983. The registration of all fishing vessels has served the region as an effective way to ensure compliance with fisheries laws and regulations of FFA member. The threat of being black listed and the risk of not being able to be licensed in any FFA member's EEZs appears to be an effective deterrent to illegal fishing activity. There were 1,233 vessels of all types on good standing on the Regional Register at the end of the 2002/2003 period. Non-confidential information of vessel listings on the Regional Register is available on request. Vessel monitoring system (VMS) The members of FFA operate and maintain a regional vessel monitoring system (VMS) in which members are able to download, on demand, data on the position speed and direction of foreign fishing vessels active inside their respective EEZs. The FFA VMS operates on a cost-recovery model of a projected 1,000 vessels. The number of vessels of all types in good standing on the FFA VMS register at the end of 2002/2003 period was 945, which falls short of the number required for the system to recover its costs. The discrepancy between the number of vessels on the Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels and the VMS Register was caused by the non-insistence of FFA member countries on the universal carriage of the FFA VMS Automatic Location Communicators (ALC) on longliners.
However, this anomaly has been addressed recently with the requirement that vessels be listed on both registers as of the current registration period, which commenced on 1 September 2003. Observer programmes A regional observer programme is coordinated by FFA Secretariat, which has a targeted coverage of 20 per cent of the US Treaty and Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement vessels fishing in the region. Information collected from the FFA regional observer programmes are held in a database at the FFA Secretariat. This enables fisheries managers from regional organisations or FFA member to access data for their differing scientific or compliance purposes. Nationals from all FFA member countries participate as observers in the regional programme. Additionally a number of FFA members run their own observer programmes, most of which have been assisted in training and establishment by the FFA Secretariat and SPC. These countries include Federated States of Micronesia, Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, Cook Islands, Marshall Islands, Kiribati and Fiji. Fisheries management plans and rights based management. With assistance from the FFA Secretariat a large number of FFA members have developed and implemented tuna management development plans. These plans have been developed with an emphasis on the establishment of rights at a national level, and focus on domestic industry development. Reference to the Code of Conduct and its principles are incorporated into all regional tuna fisheries management plans and the following example is taken from the current Tongan Tuna Management and Development Plan: The principles established in the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries will be used to guide the design and implementation of strategies under the Tuna Plan. These principles relate to, among other things: ensuring the effective conservation and management of the living marine resources; promoting management measures that ensure conservation of species belonging to the same ecosystem or associated with or dependent upon the target species; applying the precautionary approach to the conservation and management of the fishery; ensuring that harvesting, handling, processing and distribution of fish and fishery products be carried out in a manner that will maintain the nutritional value, quality and safety of the products, reduce waste and minimise negative impacts on the environment; and encouraging bilateral and multilateral cooperation in research and management for species that are highly migratory in nature; With the soon to be established WCPT Commission, the impetus for coastal Pacific States to strengthen their sovereign rights over the management and exploitation of the region's tuna resources is gaining greater significance. The Commission will be empowered to impose limits on tuna catches and each Pacific Island coastal State will be allocated a quota. The challenge for Pacific Island States will be to maximize their share of the total allowable catch and develop their tuna resources. To assist FFA members' efforts have begun to create a greater awareness of the concept of rights-based management options in regard to the tuna fishery. Rights-based management will introduce limits and allocations of the tuna resource for FFA member and they will have clearly defined rights to catch or fishing effort that can be passed onto nationals in a powerful and exclusive way. Acceptance versus implementation of management measures At a regional level the cooperation and coordination between coastal Pacific States to adopt legal instruments and policies, that are underpinned by the need to conserve and manage fisheries responsibly, and for their own economic benefit, is well advanced. It is another matter at national.
levels and recent studies suggest that the management and protection of the oceans in the Pacific region is relatively underdeveloped at a national level. The implementation of the principles and concepts of the Code of Conduct and indeed other international and regional legal fisheries instruments, presents many challenges that will not always be overcome in the near future, particularly by developing countries. Constant monitoring will be required at all levels of implementing fisheries management measures to ensure that progress is being made towards the higher goals of responsible fishing. By monitoring progress those responsible for fisheries will be able to identify where resources are best allocated to achieve the objectives of acceptable fisheries management measures, particularly if resources are limited. Also important in the process of implementing fisheries management goals are the concepts of communication, awareness and understanding of management measures. The Code of Conduct requires those involved in fisheries management to ensure that due publicity is given to conservation and management measures, laws and regulations and other legal rules, to facilitate their application and gain support for their implementation but they must first understand and be familiar with the principles of the Code on a working basis. This remains the challenge for small island developing States fisheries administrations in the region. CONCLUSION Along with the rights to conserve, manage and exploit the tuna and other living marine resources afforded to coastal States under international laws such as LOSC, comes the obligation to do so in responsible manner. The FAO Code of Conduct provides general principles of responsible fishing and along with comprehensive technical guides and plans of actions, provides a framework for the global fishing community to conserve, manage and develop fisheries accordingly. The Code declares, "States and all those engaged in fisheries management should through an appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework, adopt measures for long-term conservation and sustainable use of fisheries resources...."73. Recognition is given to the limitations of developing countries, and in the case of the Pacific region small island developing coastal States, to implement effective conservation and management schemes as proposed by the international agreed standards enshrined in international and regional conservation and fisheries instruments. The FAO Code of Conduct articulates special requirements for developing countries, which include taking into account assistance in the areas of financial and technical assistance, technology transfer, training and scientific cooperation, as well as their right to develop their own fisheries. The fisheries sector in the western and central Pacific region is well developed compared to other regions in which developing States are prevalent. For the past quarter of a century certain Pacific Island countries have developed, through regional cooperation, a number of arrangements that formalize their commitment to manage and develop the highly migratory tuna resources in the region. These include monitoring, control and surveillance mechanisms to insure compliance with national fisheries regulations and laws. The regional cooperation extends to participation in the newly established management process, which takes into account the migratory nature of tuna and the noncoverage of areas of high seas. The adoption of the WCPT Convention has brought together interested parties engaged in the tuna fishery in the region. It pits the strength and capacity of larger developed fishing States against the determination of Pacific coastal States to assert their sovereign rights to conserve, manage and develop the tuna fishery for their economic and long-term sustainable benefit.
Article 7.1.1 of the FAO Code of Conduct.
References Agenda 21, Chapter 17 (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, UNCED). 1992. Aqorau, T. 2001. Tuna Fisheries Management in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean: A Critical Analysis of the Convention for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean and Its Implications for the Pacific Island States. The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, Vol 16, No.3, pp. 379 ­ 431. Doulman, D. Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Development and Implementation Considerations, July 2000 <http://www.fao.org/fi/agreem/codecond/tonga.asp (accessed 24 August 2003) FFA 2002. Report of the Rights Based Management Workshop, 24 ­ 26 June 2002, Nadi Fiji. Pasifika Publications, Fiji. FAO 1995. Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Rome, FAO. FAO 1997 Fisheries Management. FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries. No.4. Rome. http://www.fao.org/fi/body/rbf/index.htm http://www.oceanlaw.net - accessed 26 August 2003 http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/agenda21.htm - accessed 25 August 2003 Gillett, R., McCoy, M., Rodwell, L. and Tamate, J. 2001 Tuna: A Key Economic Resource in the Pacific. Manila: Pacific Studies Series, Asian Development Bank. Gillett, R. & Lightfoot, C. 2001, The Contribution of Fisheries to the Economies of Pacific island Countries. Manila: Pacific Studies Series, Asian Development Bank. Tsamenyi, M and McIlgorm, A. 1999 International Environmental Instruments ­ their effects on the fishing industry. 2nd edition. FRDC 97 / 149.
UN Fish Stocks Agreement.
Western and Central Pacific Tuna Convention (WCPTC).
FFA Convention Nauru Agreement Implementing Agreements or MTCs.
Niue Treaty Palau Arrangement FSM Arrangement Wellington Convention.
20 Dec. 2002 13 March 2001 23 Apr. 2001 13 Aug. 2003.
17 Oct. 2001 9 Feb. 2001 9 June 2003.
5 Sept. 2000 5 Sept. 2000 Source: New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Forum Fisheries Agency Convention STATUS OF THE FFA CONVENTION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2002 State Australia Cook Islands FSM Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Niue Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Signature 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 27 March 1987 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 18 October 1979 14 April 1986 13 September 1979 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 30 August 2002 10 July 1979 10 July 1979 9 March 1981 Source: Forum Fisheries Agency Date of ratification or accession Date of Declaration.
The Treaty on Fisheries between the Governments of Certain Pacific island States and the United States of America The Treaty on Fisheries between the Governments of certain Pacific Island States and the United States was signed in April 1987 and entered into force on 14 June 1988. This Treaty became necessary as the United States, at that time did not recognise the sovereign rights of coastal states over highly migratory fish stocks in the EEZ and as such no bilateral access agreement could be entered into between the United States and the FFA member countries unless there was in place a regional agreement regulating tuna management to which it was a party. Under the current Treaty arrangements, up to fifty US purse seine vessels could be licensed to fish in the region. This brings in US$18 million into the region. The Treaty imposes on the US obligations to enforce the provisions of the Treaty in regards to US vessels having access to the licensing area under the Treaty. The provisions on Flag State responsibility are the most comprehensive that can be found in any international instrument. The Treaty will be extended for another 10 years from 15 June 2003. From 15 June 2003, US$21 million will be available for distribution amongst the Parties in exchange for 40 licences. The Wellington Convention for the Prohibition of Fishing with Long Driftnets in the South Pacific STATUS OF THE WELLINGTON CONVENTION AND PROTOCOL I AND II State Australia Canada Chile Cook Islands Federated States of Micronesia Fiji France Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Niue Palau Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu U.K. U.S.A. Vanuatu Samoa Convention Signed Ratified 2/2/90 6/7/92 Protocol I Signed Ratified Protocol II Signed Ratified 24/9/91 1/11/91 29/11/89 29/11/89 11/8/93 30/4/90 13/2/90 29/11/89 13/2/90 29/11/89 29/11/89 29/11/89 24/1/90 20/12/90 18/1/94 10/1/92 14/10/92 17/5/91 28/8/98 5/10/93.
Source: New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Niue Treaty on Cooperation in Fisheries Surveillance and Law Enforcement.
in the South Pacific Region STATUS OF THE NIUE TREATY ON COOPERATION IN FISHERIES SURVEILLANCE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC REGION AS AT DECEMBER 2002 State Australia Cook Islands Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Niue Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Date of Signature 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 11-Aug-93 11-May-93 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 11-May-93 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 11-May-93 9-Jul-92 9-Jul-92 Date of Ratification 3-Sep 93 3-Mar 93 3-Dec 93 5 Mar 96 30 Oct 94 10 Jan 95 30-Sep 92 9-Mar 93 3 Mar 99 12 Nov 94 14 May 96 27-May 94 20-May 93.
10-Nov-93 Source: Government of Niue.
2) SUBREGIONAL ARRANGEMENTS Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest STATUS OF THE NAURU AGREEMENT AS AT DECEMBER 2002 State Date of Ratification/Accession 14 July 1983 27 Apr 1982 14 Oct 1982 28 May 1985 4 Nov 1982 16 Mar 1982 18 Aug 1982 15 May 1991 Signatures of 1st Implementing Arrangement 5 May 1993 5 May 1993 5 May 1993 28 Nov 93 5 May 1993 5 May 1993 5 May 1993 5 May 1993 Signatures of 2nd Implementing Arrangement 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 19 Sept 1990 15 May 1991 Source: Forum Fisheries Agency.
FSM Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru Palau Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tuvalu.
The Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement for Regional Fisheries Access STATUS OF THE FSM ARRANGEMENT AS AT DECEMBER 2002 State FSM Kiribati Marshall Is. Nauru Palau Papua New Guinea Solomon Is. Tuvalu Source: Forum Fisheries Agency 5 Jan 1995 30 Nov. 1994 24 Aug. 1995 6 Oct. 1995 6 Oct. 1995 Date of Signature 30 Nov. 1994 30 Nov. 1994 4 Jun. 2000 Date of Accession.
The Palau Arrangement for the Management of the Western Pacific Purse Seine Fishery STATUS OF RATIFICATION OF THE PALAU ARRANGEMENT AS AT DECEMBER 2002 State FSM Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru Palau Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tuvalu Date of Signature 28 Oct. 1992 06 May 1993 28 Oct. 1992 28 Oct. 1992 28 Oct. 1992 28 Oct. 1992 08 Mar 1993 28 Oct. 1992 Source: Forum Fisheries Agency Date of Deposit 12 Apr.1995 9 Dec. 1995 28 Nov. 1994 18 Sept. 1995 24 Sept. 1999 18 Oct. 95.
3) INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS STATUS OF RATIFICATIONS OF THE LOSC BY FFA MEMBERS AT DECEMBER 2002 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Date of Ratification; Formal Confirmation 5 October 1994 15 February 1995 29 April 1991 10 December 1982 Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the Convention Ratification; Formal Confirmation; Accession Definitive Signature 5 October 1994 15 February 1995 6 September 1995 28 July 1995.
State or Entity.
Australia Cook Islands FSM Fiji Kiribati Marshall Is. 9 August 1991 Nauru 23 January 1996 23 January 1996 New Zealand 19 July 1996 19 July 1996 Niue Palau 30 September 1996 30 September 1996 Papua New Guinea 14 January 1997 14 January 1997 Samoa 14 August 1995 14 August 1995 Solomon Is. 23 June 1997 23 June 1997 Tonga 2 August 1995 2 August 1995 Tokelau Tuvalu 9 December 2002 9 December 2002 Vanuatu 10 August 1999 10 August 1999 Source: UN Oceans and Law of the Sea Office (Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea) http://www.un.org/Depts/los/Fish-status.htm The Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UN Fish Stocks Agreement) STATUS OF RATIFICATIONS OF THE UNFS AGREEMENT BY FFA MEMBERS AS AT DECEMBER 2002 State Date of signature 4 Dec. 1995 Date of ratification 23 Dec 1999 1 April 1999 23 May 1997.
Australia Cook Islands FSM 4 Dec. 1995 Kiribati Fiji 4 Dec 1995 12 Dec 1996 Marshall Islands 4 Dec 1995 Nauru 10 Jan 1997 New Zealand 4 Dec 1995 Niue 4 Dec 1995 Palau PNGuinea 4 Dec. 1995 4 June 1999 Samoa 4 Dec 1995 25 Oct 1996 Solomon Islands 13 Feb 1997 Tonga 4 Dec. 1995 31 July 1996 Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu 23 July 1996 Source: Oceans and Law of the Sea: Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, http://www.un.org/Depts/los/Fish-Status.htm.
Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (FAO Compliance Agreement).
The FAO Compliance Agreement (the "Compliance Agreement") is an agreement concluded to deal specifically with some of the principles of the LOSC and the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. Although only a low number of States have ratified it, and in spite of the almost lack of FFA members who have ratified it, the Compliance Agreement has slowly been gaining increasing acceptance especially through the process of the development of International Plans of Actions to address various aspects of fisheries management including IUU fishing. The Compliance Agreement provides a mechanism to deal with the enforcement of international conservation and management measures on the high seas, this being recognised as one of the biggest failures in international fisheries management. There are presently 27 States who have ratified the Compliance Agreement. The Compliance Agreement requires twenty-five ratification's to enter into force. It is instructive to note that Japan, United States, Canada, the European Union and Mexico have ratified the Compliance Agreement. UN Food and Agriculture Organization Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing The Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing provides guidelines for the conduct of responsible fisheries. The Code is voluntary and is intended to help countries improve the management of their fisheries resources. While the Code is voluntary, certain parts of the Code are based on relevant international law, including the UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the Compliance Agreement. The principles stipulated in the Code and the technical guidelines are intended to ensure effective conservation and management measures are applied to fisheries management. Article 2 sets out the objectives of the Code. These include the followingestablish principles, in accordance with the relevant rules of international law for responsible fishing and fisheries activities, taking into account all their relevant biological, technological, economic, social, environmental and commercial aspects; establish principles and criteria for the elaboration and implementation of national policies for responsible conservation of fisheries resources and fisheries management and development; serve as an instrument of reference to help States to establish or to improve the legal and institutional framework required for the exercise of responsible fisheries and in the formulation and implementation of appropriate measures; and provide guidance which may be used where appropriate in the formulation/implementation of international agreements and other legal instruments, both binding and voluntary. In addition, a number of technical guidelines have been developed to support the implementation of the Code. These are the technical guidelines on Fishing Operations, the Vessel Monitoring System, Precautionary Approach to Capture Fisheries and Species Introduction, Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management, Fisheries Management, Aquaculture Development, Inland Fisheries, Responsible Fish Utilization, and Indicators for Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries. International Plans of Actions (IPOA) have been developed to address aspects of specific fisheries, which, from a management and conservation context, are considered to be a problem. Some of the specific plans, which have been developed in this regard areInternational Management Plans on the Management of Fishing Capacity; Shark Fisheries; Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries; Management of Fishing Capacity; and Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing.
APPENDIX J 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES: ARTICLE 8 ­ FISHING OPERATIONS Andrew R. Smith74.
ABSTRACT This Article in the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries is probably the most important. If there were no Fishing Operations there would be no need for the other Articles in the Code. The first section of Article 8 starts off by listing the general duties of All States whether fishing is important to their economies or not. Even land-locked States can be involved indirectly in fishing as we shall see later. Indeed, the occurrence of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing is sometimes assisted by the lack of action by countries that are indirectly involved in fishing activities (i.e., registration of fishing vessels). SECTION 1: DUTIES OF ALL STATES The Chapter does to some extent have an overlap with the previous Article - Fisheries Management however this is reiterated for Fisheries Operations. The first sections are concerned with the actions to be taken by governments in order to monitor and control their fisheries. They have to ensure that only fishing operations allowed by them are carried out within their waters in a responsible manner and that they issue authorisations to fish to their vessels fishing on the high seas. For coastal states this implies that there has to be some element of Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) not only within their own jurisdiction but also to waters outside their jurisdiction, in cooperation with regional bodies. They should gather data on their fisheries in order to provide statistics. The countries should ensure that the Health and Safety Standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO) are applied to the fishing industry. The present ILO Conventions and Recommendations relating to the Fishing Industry are the following Convention 112 Concerning the Minimum Age for admission to Employment as Fishermen (1959) Convention 113 Convention concerning Medical Examinations for Fishermen (1959) Convention 114 Convention concerning the Vocational Training of Fishermen (1966) Convention 125 Convention Concerning Fishermen's Certificates of Competency (1966) Convention 126 Convention concerning Accommodation on Board Fishing Vessels (1966) And there are two recommendations: Recommendation 7 Concerning the Hours of work in the Fishing Industry (1920) Recommendation 126 Recommendations Concerning the Vocational Training of Fishermen (1966) It should however be noted that ILO are in the process of revising and consolidating these Standards into one Convention and one Recommendation. It is expected that this process will be completed at an ILO Conference in June 2005.
The author is Fishery Industry Officer, Fishery Industries Division, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Countries should also make arrangements to integrate the fishing industry into the maritime search and rescue systems which are laid out by the International Maritime Organization (IMO).75 States should also establish training programmes for their fishers and if necessary establish systems of professional qualifications.76 Records should be kept of the details of fishers service and particularly certificates of competency (Note: there is growing concern at IMO on the occurrence of Certificates of Competency, which are genuine, but have been issued by a flag state on the basis of fraudulent documentation from another state).77 SECTION 2: FLAG STATE DUTIES The second section of the Code deals with the duties of a Flag State (i.e., the state in which a vessel is registered). By virtue of the fact of registration, the country becomes responsible for the actions of the vessel and it has effective jurisdiction on that vessel, when it is in the waters of the flag state jurisdiction, on the high seas or in the waters under the jurisdiction of another flag state. In this later case, there is however a coastal state responsibility to control fishing activities so that the vessel cannot fish without the authorization from the coastal state. Some coastal states require, as a condition of joint ventures, that the vessels are bareboat chartered to the coastal state, effectively making the coastal state the flag state, and ensuring that they have full jurisdiction over the vessel. The certificate of registry is required to be carried on board the ship as evidence of its registry and the entitlement to fly the flag. Although this obligation appears to have been omitted from the Law of the Sea Convention (1982), it is in one of the earlier versions of the LOSC78. The Code requires that when fishing on the high seas or in the waters of another state the state's authorization to fish should be carried on board. It should be noted that if fishing in the waters under the jurisdiction of another state, the vessel should carry the authorization issued by the coastal state and the authorization issued by the flag State. The vessels fishing on the high seas should also be marked in accordance with an internationally recognized system such as the FAO Guidelines.79 Note that this does not pre-empt the vessel from using other vessel marking systems. The fishing gear should be marked so that the owner of the fishing gear can be identified should the fishing gear become detached from the vessel.80 Flag States should ensure compliance with safety requirements for safety requirements for fishing vessels in accordance with international conventions and guidelines and should adopt codes for small vessels not covered by conventions. The conventions and guidelines referred to are the two main Conventions for fisheries which have been agreed by IMO. These are the Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels (SFV), 1977 International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel (STCW-F). Neither of these Conventions is in force the former only having nine ratifications and the latter only four ratifications. The IMO Assembly have expressed concern on the non ratification of these Conventions and the IMO Secretariat is running a series of Regional Workshops to identify the reasons for non-ratification and to encourage countries to ratify the Conventions. There are several other non-binding guidelines and Codes agreed by FAO/ILO/IMO81 which are currently under revision which can be used for guidance.
IMO International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979. Convention on the Standards of Training Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel 1995 (STCW-F) and the FAO/ILO/IMO Document for Guidance on Training and Certification of fishing Vessel Personnel. 77 IMO Assembly Resolution on Fraudulent Certificates of Competency. 78 Reference the appropriate Convention. 79 The FAO Standard Specifications and Guidelines for Marking and Identification of Fishing Vessels. 80 Recommendations on the Marking of Fishing Gear Supplement to the Report of the Expert Consultation on the Marking of Fishing Gear Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 14 ­ 19 July 1991. FAO Fisheries Report No. 485 Suppl. Rome FAO 1993. 81 The FAO/ILO/IMO Code of Safety For Fishermen and Fishing Vessels. Part A Safety and Health Practices for Skippers and Crews. Part B Safety and Health requirements for the Construction and Equipment of Fishing Vessels. The FAO/ILO/IMO Voluntary Guidelines for the Design Construction and Equipment of Small Fishing Vessels.
The 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement is now in force and countries which have ratified the Convention are now bound by the terms of the Agreement. They are required to report to FAO all vessels over 24 meters that they authorize to fish on the high seas. They are also required to report any convictions of vessel for IUU Fishing and details of the offence. The flag States should also make certain activities that prejudice the good management of fisheries, an offence under their legislation and take adequate measures to ensure that the penalties are such as to discourage further illegal activity, including the suspension of an authorization to fish. The States should also promote access to insurance schemes and the owners should avail themselves to protect their crews and to indemnify third parties. A serious problem for many fishermen has been repatriation following the arrest of a vessel or its abandonment by the owner. This often arises when a vessel is caught fishing illegally, and the vessel and the crew are arrested. Some fishermen have remained imprisoned for many months, with the owner of the vessel unable or unwilling to pay the cost of their return home. The issue of financial responsibility in the case of abandonment of Seafarers was discussed by the Joint ILO/IMO Ad Hoc Expert Working Group on Liability and Compensation regarding claims for Death, Personal Injury and Abandonment of Seafarers. The outcome was an ILO Convention on the Repatriation of Seafarers (Revised) 1987 (No. 166). This replaced an earlier Convention that specifically excluded fishing vessels. The outcome may be relevant to the development of ILO's proposed standard concerning work in the fishing sector SECTION 3: PORT STATE DUTIES The third section deals with Port State duties as is outlined in several international agreements such as the Compliance Agreement and the UN Straddling Stocks Agreement as Port State Measures (PSM). PSM is broadly based on the IMO and ILO concept of Port State Control (PSC) which has been established to ensure implementation of safety at sea and prevention of pollution measures for IMO Conventions and of the conditions of work and service by ILO Conventions. The IMO/ILO system is based on regional agreements and consists mainly of the inspection of Certificates that the vessels have to carry under the relevant Conventions. The PSC authorities can however carry out inspections of the condition of the ship and of the living conditions and conditions of work and service by the crew to ensure that the Certificates have not been issued to ships which do not meet the criteria of the Conventions. The success of the PSC has been established by the nature of the maritime trade. In near every case the vessel travels from one port to another, which is usually in a foreign country, and the vessel can be inspected by Port State Authorities ­ usually under the maritime administration so that established procedures are already in place. However the majority of fishing vessels set sail from one port to fish then return to that port to land fish, even if they do not, then it is usually in a port of the same country and is subject to his own countries administration. If in the limited cases in which a fishing vessel does have to call in the port, then there are no IMO/ILO conventions in force for fishing vessels so PSC is not applicable (in some cases PSC has been applied to fishing vessels under MARPOL). Under PSM there are just the Compliance Agreement and the UN Straddling Stocks Agreement which contain reference to the PSM and these are not very specific and related to the inspection of documents. Some references have been made with regard to the inspections of the fish cargo to ensure that it is consistent with the entry in the fishing logbook or the manifest, however the sheer impracticality of inspecting a 1,000 ton frozen fish catch in a foreign port would probably mean that this is rarely or never done.
SECTION 4: FISHING OPERATIONS The fourth section on Fishing Operations opens by referring to the IMO Safety of Life at Sea and the Collision Regulations (SOLAS 82 and COLREGS 83 ). The other issues that come under the IMO mandate for all ships, including all fishing vessels, such as traffic separation schemes, protection of the marine environment and the prevention of damage or loss of fishing gear is mentioned. The following sections deal with fishing methods and the universally destructive fishing methods of poisoning and dynamiting is prohibited. Unfortunately, the operative sentence contains reference to "and other comparable destructive methods". Some environmental groups have set out to find such methods and seek to have them prohibited. With this in mind, the Expert Consultation on Sustainable Fishing Technologies and Practices84 agreed that "It was noted that all fishing gears impacted to some degree on the environment and that fishing gears could not be characterized as "clean" or "dirty" in this respect. Overfishing has been largely caused by the excessive amount of fishing gear being used. Overfishing could be controlled by appropriate management measures. Although it was possible to measure the impact of specific fishing gears on a particular substrate, all types of sea bottom had to be considered. A particular fishing gear might be used on a muddy silty substrate without causing any detrimental affect but it could be quite inappropriate for another more sensitive ecosystem. In this respect there was an observed need for governments to identify and map different substrate type, and where appropriate regulate fisheries according to these substrates. In particularly sensitive areas the prohibition of certain gears should be considered. The use of Vessel Monitoring systems to monitor closed areas was recommended." States should ensure that data on the quantity and type of fish caught are recorded by the vessels and reported to the appropriate authorities. This generally means the skippers filling in logbooks. However It should be noted that the section includes reference to quantifying discards. SECTION 5: FISHING GEAR SELECTIVITY Fishing Gear Selectivity has been raised as an issue that can to some extent reduce the discard of unwanted catch from fishing vessels. The original estimate of 27 million tons +/- 12 million tons has now been drastically reduced following detailed analysis. Nevertheless even lower quantities of discards and waste are environmentally and socially unacceptable. FAO is dealing with the development of Guidelines and a Methodology for countries to measure their discards and for them to take measures to mitigate the amount of discards. With regard to the means achieving increased fishing gear selectivity, many countries have developed equipment and devices which allow the escape of unwanted species and sizes of fish. To date, the work has concentrated on the fishing gears which have been identified as those with high levels of discards or those which capture charismatic or endangered species. The fishing gears involved have been purse seines, shrimp trawls, bottom trawls and long lines. Although these are further explained below, it must be emphasized that specialist publications are referred to which gives further guidance.
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974 (as amended). Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 (COLREGs) (as amended). 84 Report of the Expert Consultation on Sustainable Fishing Technologies and Practices, St Johns's , Newfoundland, Canada, 1­ 6th March 1998. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 588. Rome, FAO. 1998. 17p.
Purse Seines Normally purse seines are not considered to be a problem with species selectivity as most schooling pelagic species are mono-specific and tend to be all of one size. However in tuna fisheries a problem occurs with the catch of dolphins along with the tuna. In fact in many cases the purse-seiner sets the net on schools of dolphin with the knowledge that there is likely to be schools of tuna swimming beneath the dolphins. The original problem occurred in the 1980s and threatened to have a ban on purse seining. However, the problem was resolved to a great extent by the fishing vessels adopting procedures that involved modifications to the net i.e. The Medina Panel, named after the fisherman who invented it) and associated back down procedures which spilled the higher swimming dolphins out of the net leaving the tuna in the net. Shrimp Trawls Shrimp trawls have been associated with a high rate of discards in several shrimp fisheries. A figure of 90 percent discards has been used and the amount of discards extrapolated on this basis. However this is a gross simplification as many shrimp fisheries have no discards and there are numerous fisheries in developing countries where the by-catch is used for human consumption. The problem is mainly caused by the very high value of the shrimp catch and the very low value of the other fish caught (i.e. mainly small juvenile fish. Large fish are usually able to swim away from the trawl). Turtles have also been caught in trawls and selectivity devices have to be introduced that both reduce the amount of unwanted fish catch and to eliminate the possibility of catching turtles. This requires two completely different types of device (i.e., Turtle Excluder Devices (TEDS and By-Catch Excluder devices (BEDs) to avoid the catch of juvenile fish). FAO are currently executing a project funded by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) in cooperation with a number of developing countries to introduce both types of device into their fisheries as appropriate. Bottom Trawls The selectivity of bottom trawls are usually dictated by the cod-end mesh size - fish beneath a certain size are able to pass through the mesh and escape (whether they survive this ordeal is another issue). The problem occurs when several fish species are targeted and the optimum mesh size for each species is different. It is then inevitable that some juvenile species are caught and at the same time fish of another species that are mature escape. The problem is compounded that most bottom trawl fisheries are multi-species and that fishers have devised several methods to circumvent the escape of small fish through the cod-end mesh. This has led to very complicated regulations to prevent fishermen from using these techniques. In the search for better selectivity, square mesh as opposed to diamond mesh has been proposed. Square mesh has a better selectivity, but is more difficult to arrange in the net. This has led to the use of square mesh panels in the section of the net leading to the cod-end rather than in the cod-end itself. Long Lines Long lines could be considered to be the most selective of fishing gear with the species being caught mainly the larger fish species. However in the operation of long-lines, there is often a catch of seabirds as it is being set as the birds come down to feed on the bait. This is not much of a problem where seabirds are in abundance (although unfortunate). Where it does come as a problem is where the birds are an endangered species. This is particularly so in the southern oceans where several species of albatross are considered to be endangered. Twenty-two species of seabird are reported to be globally threatened - including 17 albatross species. Several mitigation measures have been adopted and there is an International Plan of Action on Seabirds. The mitigation measures used are set long-line gear at night. Albatrosses are most active during the day and at dusk.
Decrease lights that illuminate the water at night. Lights only help the birds find the bait. Throw hooks into the water from the lee side of the boat. Hooks sink faster there than on the turbulent windward side. Haul in gear as fast as possible and keep the line coming up at a steep angle to the surface. Thaw bait completely. Frozen bait floats. Only buy bait with deflated swim bladders. Air trapped in bait bodies makes them float. At some cost to fishermen, they can: Buy and use bird lines. These contain lightweight flags that scare off birds. Use weighted hooks to help them sink faster. SECTION 6: ENERGY OPTIMIZATION The Fishing industry is very dependent on fossil fuels and this section deals with the economic impacts of fuel prices in the fishing operations. The effects of the fuel exhausts in the atmosphere are dealt with in Section.
At sea, there is no possibility of using other forms of energy such as electricity, nuclear power and other alternative energy sources such as gas or coal would require very substantial changes to the power machinery on board. This means that the fishing industry becomes very dependent on fossil fuels, particularly diesel for larger vessels and petrol for smaller vessels using small inboard and outboard engines. Each fishing method uses different amounts of fuel which can be expressed as a percentage of the total costs of running a vessel. This figure ranges between 10 and 30 percent under normal circumstances. However in times of fuel crisis where the price increases by up to 30 percent the percentage of the total costs attributed to fuel increases to the extent that in many cases the fishing vessels operation becomes uneconomic. The subject of energy optimisation tends to be forgotten about when fuel prices are low and then it becomes vitally important when fuel prices rise. SECTION 7: PROTECTION OF THE AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT The UN organization with the mandate for the prevention of pollution of the marine environment is IMO and they have implemented the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships which was agreed in 1973 and modified by a Protocol in 1978 (MARPOL 73/78)85. MARPOL applies to all ships, including fishing vessels, even though it is aimed mainly at larger ships such as oil tankers and ships whose fuel could cause contamination and pollution. The London Dumping Convention relates to other forms of waste and spoil disposal and to all types of substances including garbage. 86 Although fishing vessels are far smaller in size to merchant vessels, they are far more numerous and the cumulative effect of oil discharge and garbage discharge could be greater. One item that is specific to fishing vessels is the loss or dumping of fishing gear. This issue was one of the reasons for the Expert Consultation on the Marking of Fishing Gear87 Guidelines on the marking of fishing gear is contained in a Supplement to the Report88. It should be noted that some loss of fishing gear is inevitable and allowances have to be made for this, but the deliberate dumping of old or unwanted fishing gear should not be allowed under the London Dumping Convention.
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL 73/78).
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972.
The Report of the Expert Consultation on the Marking of Fishing Gear. 88 Supplement to the Report of the Expert Consultation on the Marking of Fishing Gear.
SECTION 8: PROTECTION OF THE ATMOSPHERE In recent years serious concerns have been raised over the issue of global warming and as outlined earlier the fishing industry is a prolific user of fossil fuels. The amount of nitrous oxides discharged into the atmosphere is considerable and care should be taken that this is minimized. This can be done by careful maintenance of engines and where necessary the fitting of catalytic converters. The fishing industry is and has been a primary user of refrigeration and older systems used chloroflourocarbons (CFCs) and hydroflourocarbons (HFCs). The use of these substances in new refrigeration systems has been discontinued but older systems might still be in use. Care should be taken in the scrapping of vessels that these substances that are particularly damaging to the atmosphere are not released directly into to the atmosphere but are collected and disposed of by experts. In a similar manner fire extinguishers used halon gases as an extinguishing agent for fighting fires. These are no longer acceptable SECTION 9: HARBOURS AND LANDING PLACES FOR FISHING VESSELS Fishing harbours and landing are a central focus for the support of fishing activities. The larger vessels require deeper water to remain afloat at all times and this requires the appropriate structures to provide shelter in the event of bad weather. Provisions are normally made for the marketing and sale of fish and the provisioning and repair of the fishing vessels. Needless to say that the concentration of numerous vessels in an enclosed area creates an environment that is readily polluted. Vessels change oil, land fish and wash out their fish holds in these enclosed area which leads inevitably to pollution. The supply of fresh water and sanitation is an absolute necessity.89 The cost of harbour infrastructures are very expensive and in many cases mistakes have been made that have cost tens of millions of dollars, hence the design and construction of fishing harbours should only be carried out after detailed environmental and economic study with all people involve in coastal area management. SECTION 10: ABANDONMENT OF STRUCTURES AND OTHER MATERIALS The fishing industry is not the only users of the marine environment and structures have been built for the oil industry and other uses. Concern has been raised over the removal of these structures after their useful purposes have been served. The industries have on the other hand been concerned over the cost of the removal of these structures and have suggested that simply removing the structures to a depth at which is considered navigable is sufficient to meet their obligations that the structures should be removed. It should be remembered that in many cases these structures are no longer owned by the original owners and in many cases feel that they are not bound by the original agreements. Some companies have even suggested that such partial structures could be useful as fish aggregation devices motivated by the fact that this would also save millions of dollars. It is essential that the competent fisheries authorities are consulted prior to such decisions being made. Standards and guidelines have been drawn up by the IMO for the removal of these redundant offshore structures. SECTION 11: ARTIFICIAL REEFS AND FISH AGGREGATION DEVICES In recent years, the use of artificial reefs and fish aggregation devices has been used to develop more efficient fishing operations.90 Artificial reefs provide a habitat for bottom living organisms which in turn provide an environment that attracts fish and other marine resources. However the indiscriminate construction of these artificial reefs can be detrimental to other users of the sea and care should be taken that the materials that are used for the construction are relatively inert and do not cause pollution.
Sciortino. J.A. Ravikamur R. Fishery Harbour Manual on the Prevention of Pollution Bay of Bengal Programme BOBP/MAG/22 Madras, India. 90 South Pacific Commission fish aggregating device (FAD) manual by James Anderson and Paul D. Gates ISBN 982-203482-2 (set) ISBN 982-203-485-7 (v.i).
In shallow waters care should be taken that the appropriate clearances are sought from the appropriate authorities and that such structures are clearly identified on navigation charts.91 Fish aggregation devices (FADs) attract fish in a similar fashion but float free in the water or are moored so that coastal fishermen can use them for an extended period of time. The fish are attracted to the attachments to the FAD and thereby increase the density of fish which in turn makes the fishing operation more economic. Recently there have been some concerns that this might lead to overfishing. Some FADs are relatively small and made from natural materials but on the other hand some are large and made of steel so that they could constitute a danger of collision to passing vessels. In this later case, authorization should be sought from the maritime authorities and when put in place the maritime authorities should ensure that the FAD is entered into navigational charts.
FAO Fisheries Circular No. 865. Tortell (1993) A review of the environmental and legal implications of artificial reefs. 61pp.
APPENDIX K RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES AND ITS APPLICATION TO THE PACIFIC ISLANDS Ben Ponia92 ABSTRACT Guidance for responsible aquaculture can be found within the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. This Code alongside other international conventions has established global values for states to incorporate into their national framework for development. This document is primarily concerned with the Pacific region covering the 22 member countries of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community. It reviews the status of aquaculture (and inland fisheries) in the region and reveals that substantial activity is occurring in these sectors. This document aims to demonstrate the relevance of the Code to the aquaculture sector in the Pacific Island states by highlighting practical examples of its application. Countries are encouraged to apply the principles of the Code in order for sustainable aquaculture to prevail in the region. BACKGROUND Aquaculture may be viewed as an innovative means to prevail over the limited resources and scarce market opportunities that typically occur in the Pacific. For a region that is mostly comprised of coastal populations whom inhabit approximately 500 islands, there are numerous opportunities for mariculture (farming in the sea). Freshwater aquaculture is also applicable to the large Melanesian countries with inland populations. Aquaculture can target either foreign export markets or food security requirements. Its prospects are not necessarily diminished by the fact that three-quarters of the Pacific population live in rural and often remote locations. The challenge of aquaculture is tremendous and diverse. Aquaculture tests the traditional hunter ("fisherman") instincts prevalent among the Pacific Islands and requires a gatherer's ("farmer") approach. Aquaculture straddles both the sea i.e. fisheries, and the land, i.e. agriculture, and can be applied in marine, brackish and freshwater systems. For example the geographic extent for aquaculture in the Pacific may involve farming in deep-sea oceanic conditions or fresh water farming in the mountainous highlands of Melanesia. According to FAO statistics (2003) on a global scale aquaculture is responsible for about one third (27.3 per cent) of the world's supply of fish, crustaceans and molluscs. It is the fastest growing food production sector increasing at a rate of 9.2 per cent per annum since 1970 compared to only 1.4 per cent for capture fisheries and 2.8 per cent for terrestrial farmed meat. In 2000, the reported production was 45.7 million tonnes worth US56.5 billion dollars. INTRODUCTION The Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF) was developed by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in conformity with accepted international conventions. The Code covers six thematic areas, fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture development, integration of fisheries into coastal area management, post-harvest practices and trade, and fisheries research. The Code is voluntary however it is based on rules of international law.
Aquaculture Adviser, Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
This document is primarily concerned with the application of the Code with regards to aquaculture and associated culture based fisheries. In addition the scope of this treatise covers inland fisheries amongst the countries in the region with significant freshwater systems. The goal of this report is to encourage responsible aquaculture development. The purpose is to demonstrate to national managers the applicability of the Code's principles in the context of Pacific region.
Definitions.
Aquaculture: The definition of aquaculture used in this document is that provided by the FAO: "Aquaculture is the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some sort of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated. For statistical purposes, aquatic organisms which are harvested by an individual or corporate body which has owned them throughout their rearing period contribute to aquaculture while aquatic organisms which are exploitable by the public as a common property resource, with or without appropriate licences, are the harvest of fisheries." Status of aquaculture in the Pacific Many of the current forms of modern aquaculture in the Pacific can trace their early interventions back to the 1950's when a wave of experts from international and regional organisations began to advise newly independent states on how to manage their fisheries resources. A high proportion of the aquaculture projects initiated in this era did not bear successful fruition and a stigma was attached to the reputation of aquaculture that continues to linger today. Some of the early failures of aquaculture developments could be accounted by a poor understanding of the socio-economic and ecological characteristics of the region (Uwate et al, 1984). Projects that had been a technical success in regions elsewhere, for e.g. in southeast Asia, could not simply be transposed directly to the Pacific. This is because key factors such as markets, social values, labour costs and appropriate sites are unique to the region. However the seeds sown had captured the interest of the Pacific Islands. Some significant sub-regional and bilateral programs came into existence for e.g., CTSA support to the U.S affiliated states, IFREMER programs in the French territories, several large bilateral projects funded by JICA and in the early 1990's the ACIAR giant clam project set up clam hatcheries among the South Pacific. The FAO funded SPADP project in mid 90's was the beginning of a rejuvenated effort from international and regional organisations to be involved in aquaculture. In the early 2000 the SPC took up the vacuum left by termination of the SPADP project and developed a regional program to encompass all 22 of its Pacific Island member countries. Among the key regional organisations in the Pacific (CROP) the SPC was mandated as the regional focal point for aquaculture. Updated information on the status of aquaculture in the Pacific is available from the SPC aquaculture portal http://www.spc.int/aquaculture.
Commercial aquaculture.
Commercial scale aquaculture is relatively new to the Pacific region although its research and development stages can stretch back several decades. The actual value of commercial production is hard to estimate because of the poor quality of statistics available. However, the amount is estimated to be somewhere in the range of USD130-180 million dollars per annum. This figure is quite a substantial amount and in comparison to per annum value of.
the fisheries sector during the late 1990's it is roughly equivalent to the revenue generated by the regions massive tuna resource93 and twice the monetary value of the coastal fisheries harvested94. There are two dominant aquaculture industries in the Pacific region which account for about 90 per cent of the value of production. These are black-pearl culture and marine prawn farming. Cultured black pearls from the black-lip pearl oyster (Pinctada margaritifera) are almost entirely produced from French Polynesia and the Cook Islands. There are thirty five atolls in French Polynesia where farming occurs or is under development. The industry reached a peak in production in 2000 with production valued at USD160 million dollars (11.4 tonnes). In the Cook Islands, cultured black pearls are mostly produced from one atoll and in 2000 a peak export of USD9 million dollars was achieved. In both countries, the pearl industry is ranked as the most significant economic sector after tourism. It provides employment to approximately 4,500 people. Small pearl farms have been established in the Fiji Islands, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Solomon Islands, Kiribati and Papua New Guinea. Pearl farms are also being established or proposed in Tonga, Tokelau and Tuvalu. New Caledonia is the largest producer of marine prawns in the region. In 2002 the country produced USD22 million dollars (1,800 tonnes) of the western blue prawn (Litopenaeus stylirostris). With the new farms under development the amount of production is expected to double by 2007 to 4,000 tonnes. Prawn farming employs approximately 900 persons. The Fiji Islands also has a high interest in marine prawns and freshwater shrimp farming. The demand from the domestic industry is in the order of 600 tonnes per annum. The farming of the giant freshwater shrimp (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) and the giant tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon) is currently being pursued. Seaweed (Kappaphycus alvarezii) is viewed as one of the ideal aquaculture commodities for the Pacific because it requires low costs to set-up, is easily cultivated in shallow waters and can be farmed by remote, rural communities. Seaweed has proven to be a substitute for the ailing copra industry. The combined production from the Pacific at its peak has been around 1,500 tonnes per annum, but it is thought that 10,000 tonnes is required to enable a sufficient scale of economy to occur. The line atolls in Kiribati were until recently the main producers of seaweed. In 1996 about 1,100 households were engaged in seaweed farming and this activity was considered a major contribution to rural household income. In 1999 there was 1,000 tonnes exported from the Kiribati worth USD360,000 dollars. In 1998, Fiji Islands also rejuvenated its seaweed farming effort with 182 farms established and commercial production soon after. Some production is occurring in the Solomon Islands whilst Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea efforts are currently under development. Giant clam aquaculture for the marine ornamental market is widespread throughout the Pacific. The commonly targeted species are Tridacna maxima and T. derasa. Commercial hatchery production occurs in Fiji, Palau, Marshall Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Kiribati, Samoa and American Samoa. In 2000, Vanuatu exported 120,000 pieces of giant clam, many collected from the wild. A moratorium was put in place after concerns over the sustainability of the harvesting. The volume of trade is not known but in view of demand and current hatchery production amongst countries, it probably exceeds 50,000 pieces per annum.
93 Note: Although the tuna caught in the Pacific region was worth approximately AUD2 billion, the Pacific only receives a small percentage of revenue from access fees of the foreign fishing fleets. 94 Source of fisheries statistics: tuna revenue from Gillet (1997) and value of coastal fisheries in Dalzell et al (1996).
In addition to giant clam, some culture of "live rock" and corals (hard and soft species) is conducted for the live aquarium trade. Several species of seawater, brackish and freshwater fishes are farmed for commercial purposes. A successful barramundi farm has been established in Papua New Guinea. Whilst in French Polynesia most of the five barramundi (Lates calcarifer) fish farms (15 tonnes in 2001) have ceased their operations and instead there is interest in farming the local fish species moi. In Fiji more then 100 tonnes per annum of tilapia is sold on the local markets and demand is said to exceed supply. On Guam the volume of tilapia has steadily decreased from 150 tonnes in 1993 with the aquaculturists shifting their interest into marine prawn farming. On Kiribati a milkfish (Chanos chanos) farm located in Tarawa with 80 hectare area is producing live juveniles for the tuna baitfish industry and plans to market adult smoked fish to overseas markets. Various other aquaculture commodities are being farmed. Mozuku seaweed (Cladosiphon sp) is farmed in Tonga, between 50 to100 tonnes is cultured from the 250-350 tonnes harvested. The price of the dried product is USD3 dollars per 20 grams or USD150 dollars per kilogram. The freshwater crayfish, red claw (Cherax quadricarinatus) is farmed in New Caledonia with 6 tonnes produced in 2001 and production expected to rise to meet the domestic demand of 50 tonnes. Some small scale farming of mud crab (Scylla spp) also occurs.
Artisanal and subsistence aquaculture.
It is a common misnomer that the Pacific Islands are teeming with reef fish and that every family has fresh fish from the wild at their whim. However as any cursory trip to the market will show, fresh fish is often expensive and scarce and canned fish is often the cheaper option and commonly consumed in households. Depleted fish stocks, increasing human population, and the transition to a cash-led society are some of the reasons why the wild fisheries are no longer in a healthy state. Traditionally aquaculture was not a common practice in the Pacific. One of the exceptions is milkfish farming whereby the practice of stocking of fry trapped from the wild into coastal ponds was a widespread throughout Polynesia and Micronesia. The farmed milkfish had a high social value and the harvest was often reserved for special occasions. In comparison to the neighbouring south east Asian countries, subsistence or artisanal aquaculture in the Pacific is not that well developed. However fish and shrimp farming is becoming of high interest, especially amongst inland rural communities with freshwater systems that do not have abundant sources of indigenous fish protein. Recently there has been a lot of development of this nature among the large Melanesian countries such as Fiji and Papua New Guinea which have substantial inland populations. In Fiji, the tilapia is an important crop. Approximately 400 tonnes per annum is harvested, some for commercial purposes. Although the Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) is the most common variety the species currently being promoted is GIFT tilapia, a strain of the Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) with superior growth rates. Farming programs are supported by government which provides technical support and seed stock. Integrated farming systems with poultry and pigs are practised. Polyculture with other species such as macrobrachium shrimp have also been implemented. In Papua New Guinea, inland pond aquaculture is growing at a rapid pace. A recent assessment by ACIAR in 2003 found that there are 10,000 fish farmers in the country. About 5-10 per cent of the farms are relatively well-developed operations, with more then 1,000 fish, and focused on selling to restaurants or exports. Common carp was farmed in 90 per cent of the farms and home consumption accounted for 40 per cent of the fish, an important source of protein.
Two types of the common carp (Cyprinus carpio) are farmed in Papua New Guinea. The Golden and Cantonese varieties. The carp is reared in both the high and lowland areas. The rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) is also farmed in the cooler upper highland areas where the water temperatures are suitable. One commodity of growing interest in the region is the Pacific shrimp (Macrobrachium lar). This species is indigenous throughout the Pacific region from eastern Polynesia to west Melanesia. It can easily be collected as fry, attains a large size and is reputed to survive under high stocking densities. With these features in mind the Pacific shrimp is a likely candidate for aquaculture. Already in Vanuatu there are reports of villagers whom have successfully harvested Pacific shrimp farmed in an integrated system with the taro swamps. Such type of farming could be widely applied throughout the Pacific and may be an important future source of artisanal activity and subsistence protein.
Inland fisheries.
Inland fisheries are significant in only a few of the Pacific Islands, particularly Papua New Guinea and Fiji Islands. In Papua New Guinea the two major inland river systems are the Sepik River on the east coast and the Fly River on the west. The barramundi fishery in the Fly River and Lake Murray is one of the most important inland fisheries. The commercial fishery involving freezer boats began in the mid-1960's, peaked in the 1980's and ceased by 1993. Now days only land based freezers are in operation. Record landings in 1999 were about 170 tonnes valued at approximately USD200 thousand dollars or 15 per cent of the countries fisheries catch value (National Fisheries Authority, 2003). Mozambique tilapia, originally introduced to the highlands, spread into the lowland and coastal Sepik River areas and became an important artisanal fishery. In Fiji there are a diverse range of molluscs, crustaceans and fishes that are valuable inland fisheries. These include shellfish, Mozambique tilapia, eels (Anguilla spp), Tor (Puntius spp), Pacific shrimp (Macrobrachium lar) and Palaemon shrimp. According to the records of the Government of Fiji, Ministry of Fisheries and Forestry, the sales at municipal markets for freshwater Pacific shrimp is between 170-200 tonnes per annum and Palameon shrimp up to 25 tonnes. Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
Relevant international conventions.
In addition to the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries there are international guidelines that help determine global values for aquaculture. At the upper echelon of global politics are broad international conventions that set strategic directions for aquaculture development. World leaders at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro adopted the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) which aims to conserve biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits from the use of genetic resources. Within the convention are principles inherent for sustainable aquaculture development.
Ten years later the agenda was revisited at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) held in Johannesburg, 2003. The Summit put special emphasis on five areas: water and sanitation; energy; health; agricultural productivity; and biodiversity and ecosystem management. Commitments referring to both fisheries and agriculture make reference to supporting sustainable aquaculture, including small-scale developments - acknowledging the growing importance of aquaculture sector for food security and economic development. Other important conventions affecting aquaculture include CITES and UNCLOS. At a more sectoral level there have been various expert forums, which have produced guidelines directly applicable to aquaculture. The Bangkok Declaration and Strategy was derived from the FAO/NACA Conference on Aquaculture in the Third Millennium held in Bangkok, 2000. The Bangkok Strategy is a strategic platform with a list of key elements which states are encouraged to incorporate into their aquaculture development as the third millennium begins. The International Aquatic Animal Health Code (2000) produced by the animal world health organization OIE is designed to facilitate international trade in aquatic animal products and aims to provide detailed guidelines of minimum health guarantees required of trading partners to avoid the risk of spreading diseases. The OIE standards are of particular importance to commodities being exported internationally because of their relationship with the WTO policies. Recognizing the specific concerns of the Asia region the FAO and NACA have produced the Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. These guidelines are especially oriented towards the needs of developing countries and applicable to the Pacific region also. The ICES Code of Practice on the Introductions and Transfer of Marine Organisms (2003) puts forth recommended procedures and practices to diminish the detrimental effects from the intentional introduction and transfer of marine and brackish water organisms. This code was initially designed with ICES member countries concerned with the north Atlantic but all countries across the globe are encouraged to implement its code of practice.
Status of aquaculture policy and legislation in the Pacific Islands.
A recent review of twenty one Pacific Island countries conducted for the SPC by Evans et al, (2003) provided a useful benchmark of the status of aquaculture policy and legislation in the region. The Evans review found that there was a general absence of aquaculture policies both at regional and national levels. Similarly the majority of countries do not have specific legislation dealing with aquaculture, often relying on provisions in other statutes, particularly fisheries legislation. Regarding the trend among countries to draft Bills dedicated to aquaculture it was suggested that the first option may be to consider legal requirements for aquaculture being better integrated into the existing statutes. An imbalance was noted with some Pacific Island countries with relatively little aquaculture developments having more elaborate legislation or prescriptive regulations compared to those countries with substantial industries. Although the circumstances for each country are distinct the review found some common issues that should be prescribed in policy and legislation. These minimum conditions include (1) provision of effective means for allocation of space (2) provision of statutory rights for sale of aquaculture fish and collection of broodstock and spat (3) renewable licensing for environmental effects (4) devolution of monitoring and enforcement of controls and (5) seafood safety controls.
A regional approach to certain components of the regulatory framework may be the most efficient method and advantageous in terms of scales of economy and gains in equity. This would cover issues such as: translocations of live aquatic organisms; customary, private and investor rights and responsibilities; transfer of technology; information collection and record keeping; and conduct of responsible aquaculture research or trials. Efforts are being made to promote regional standards in the absence of national policy or legislation. For example at the 3rd SPC Heads of Fisheries meeting (Noumea, August 2003) a set of motherhood principles were adopted regarding translocation and introduction of aquatic organisms 95 . These principles are appended. With the current climate conducive to regional approaches for aquaculture development it is anticipated that further policy guidelines will be adopted for the region. At a more strategic level the country's leaders at the Pacific Islands Forum, Fiji, August 2002, have adopted a Pacific Islands oceans policy96. This policy sets out five guiding principles: (1) improving the understanding of the ocean; (2) sustainably developing and managing the use of ocean resources; (3) maintaining the health of the ocean; (4) promoting the peaceful use of the ocean; and (5) creating partnerships and promoting co-operation. Principle 2 has explicit implications for aquaculture. It should be noted that the policy and legislation efforts within the Pacific region are complimentary to the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The Code and regional policies set global values that can be incorporated into regional and national policies. It may be adopted as an interim measure in those sovereign countries that have a lack of national aquaculture policy or legislation. CCRF articles relating to aquaculture The Code of Conduct promotes the three pillars of sustainable development - economic development, social development and environmental protection. This is the context and scope under which aquaculture is considered. The General Principle of the Code puts aquaculture into perspective: "States should consider aquaculture, including culture-based fisheries, as a means to promote diversification of income and diet. In so doing, States should ensure that resources are used responsibly and adverse impacts on the environment and on local communities are minimized." Article 6.19 The FAO has produced a series of Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries which a more detailed analysis of the Code and its articles and its practical implementation are discussed. Relevant publications addressing aquaculture and inland fisheries include, Guideline No. 5 ­ Aquaculture Development and supplement guideline No. 5.1 Good Aquaculture Feed Manufacturing Practice; Guideline No.6 - Inland Fisheries; No.3 - Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management; and No. 7 ­ Responsible Fish Utilization. Article No. 9 of the Code ­ Aquaculture Development, contains the principles most directly concerned with aquaculture and will be discussed in more detail.
SPC-HoF Guidelines for the Introduction and Translocation of Aquatic Organisms for Aquaculture and Culture-Based Fisheries. http://www.spc.int/coastfish/Reports/HOF3/E-WP8.pdf. 96 Pacific Islands Regional Oceans Policy. http://www.piocean.org/policy/oceanpolicy.htm.
Article 9.1: Responsible development within national jurisdiction.
9.1 Responsible development of aquaculture, including culture-based fisheries, in areas under national jurisdiction 9.1.1 States should establish, maintain and develop an appropriate legal and administrative framework which facilitates the development of responsible aquaculture. 9.1.2 States should promote responsible development and management of aquaculture, including an advance evaluation of the effects of aquaculture development on genetic diversity and ecosystem integrity, based on the best available scientific information. 9.1.3 States should produce and regularly update aquaculture development strategies and plans, as required, to ensure that aquaculture development is ecologically sustainable and to allow the rational use of resources shared by aquaculture and other activities. 9.1.4 States should ensure that the livelihoods of local communities, and their access to fishing grounds, are not negatively affected by aquaculture developments. 9.1.5 States should establish effective procedures specific to aquaculture to undertake appropriate environmental assessment and monitoring with the aim of minimizing adverse ecological changes and related economic and social consequences resulting from water extraction, land use, discharge of effluents, use of drugs and chemicals, and other aquaculture activities.
It is imperative that national authorities establish a strategic framework within which policies, legislation and administration can be collated and coordinated. As noted in the region, typically the policy and legislation regime has not been well developed. The detrimental impact of this situation is that the process for planning, approval and monitoring of aquaculture is poorly coordinated. In terms of legislation the Evans et al (2003) report has pointed out that in some countries where low level of aquaculture activity occurs there is are over-prescriptive legislation and regulations, whilst in other countries the reverse is true. A balance has to be found to encourage and yet limit development whereby controls cannot be too administrative on the (often) limited management and scientific resources of the country. Therefore efforts to devolve control (include community management systems) may have merit. In most cases, fisheries departments have been deemed the national focal point for the aquaculture sector. This is logical because of the extension of aquaculture to fisheries resources, (although there are instances where an autonomous administration has been formed, as is the case of the Ministry for Pearl Culture in French Polynesia). It is the responsibility of focal points to clearly identify their role to other aquaculture stakeholders and potentially conflicting resource users in order to negotiate a balanced input of development. Transparent and accountable roles are also important to resolving conflict amongst users. Prior informed consent between parties is fundamental. On the one hand local communities should be consulted to ensure that proposed aquaculture does not affect traditional livelihoods or impinge on social values. On the other hand, investors need security of their property rights and tenure. Not all countries possess sufficient capacity to infuse scientific probability into their management of aquaculture, particularly where it concerns environment matters. The precautionary principle approach is always a fall back option. But wherever possible States should also encourage the training of their professionals so that they may collect and analyze the data themselves. Utilizing past lessons learnt.
may also provide a guide to appropriate decisions to be made. In addition, Pacific Island countries should be aware that the region has expert agencies with a high level of specialization that may be able to assist. For example the Cook Islands pearl culture industry has been the recipient from SOPAC of detailed underwater digital mapping of its atoll lagoons where pearl farming occurs in order to determine the proper allocation of space for pearl farms. SOPAC is also assisting in establishing a water quality monitoring buoy as an early warning system of pearl disease conditions. The buoy can remotely monitor and transmit data to the headquarters on the capital island.
Article 9.2: Responsible development within trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems 9.2 Responsible development of aquaculture including culture-based fisheries within transboundary aquatic ecosystems 9.2.1 States should protect trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems by supporting responsible aquaculture practices within their national jurisdiction and by cooperation in the promotion of sustainable aquaculture practices. 9.2.2 States should, with due respect to their neighbouring States, and in accordance with international law, ensure responsible choice of species, sitting and management of aquaculture activities which could affect trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems. 9.2.3 States should consult with their neighbouring States, as appropriate, before introducing non-indigenous species into trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems. 9.2.4 States should establish appropriate mechanisms, such as databases and information networks to collect, share and disseminate data related to their aquaculture activities to facilitate cooperation on planning for aquaculture development at the national, subregional, regional and global level. 9.2.5 States should cooperate in the development of appropriate mechanisms, when required, to monitor the impacts of inputs used in aquaculture. Trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems are not a common feature of the region. With the exception of Papua New Guinea and Western Papua the Pacific Islands do not share common rivers, basins or watersheds of this nature. The introduced pests from the West Papua rivers are a threat to Papua New Guinea and the "koi" disease currently affecting carp fishes in Indonesia could well spread through the area in the same manner. Among the countries of the region, the most likely corridor where transboundary ecosystem may overlap would be Bouganville Island which straddles the borders of Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands. The greatly improved interconnectivity and short trans-shipment times offered by air transportation links is a trans-boundary issue that poses a major threat to the island ecosystems. Non indigenous species are often trans-shipped live between countries by airfreight in a haphazard manner without proper quarantine procedures. The risks of unwanted introductions are being exacerbated by the low capacity of quarantine and custom officials for proper protocols to deal with aquatic organisms. Typically these officials are more focused on threats to the agricultural sector. From an ecological point of view the trans-boundary issues are not necessarily compatible with the political boundaries that define national sovereignty. Hence states themselves should also deal seriously with the issue of local trans-boundary ecosystems within their country borders. Especially in localities of high natural or cultural bio-diversity or where endemic/rare populations occur.
Regional cooperation amongst countries can minimize the threats caused by trans-boundary impacts and states should endeavour to share information about activities that may pose a threat to the ecosystem of its neighbouring countries. Regional networking and information clearing house mechanisms are important tools, which can improve coordination. Presently, such services are being implemented by the SPC in its role as the regional focal point for aquaculture.
Article 9.3: Use of genetic resources 9.3 Use of aquatic genetic resources for the purposes of aquaculture including culturebased fisheries 9.3.1 States should conserve genetic diversity and maintain integrity of aquatic communities and ecosystems by appropriate management. In particular, efforts should be undertaken to minimize the harmful effects of introducing non-native species or genetically altered stocks used for aquaculture including culture-based fisheries into waters, especially where there is a significant potential for the spread of such non-native species or genetically altered stocks into waters under the jurisdiction of other States as well as waters under the jurisdiction of the State of origin. States should, whenever possible, promote steps to minimize adverse genetic, disease and other effects of escaped farmed fish on wild stocks. 9.3.2 States should cooperate in the elaboration, adoption and implementation of international codes of practice and procedures for introductions and transfers of aquatic organisms. 9.3.3 States should, in order to minimize risks of disease transfer and other adverse effects on wild and cultured stocks, encourage adoption of appropriate practices in the genetic improvement of broodstocks, the introduction of non-native species, and in the production, sale and transport of eggs, larvae or fry, broodstock or other live materials. States should facilitate the preparation and implementation of appropriate national codes of practice and procedures to this effect. 9.3.4 States should promote the use of appropriate procedures for the selection of broodstock and the production of eggs, larvae and fry. 9.3.5 States should, where appropriate, promote research and, when feasible, the development of culture techniques for endangered species to protect, rehabilitate and enhance their stocks, taking into account the critical need to conserve genetic diversity of endangered species.
Article 9.3 deals with fundamental issues that concern most government agencies today - that of introducing new genetic material into the natural system. The past few decades have been a period of high levels of introductions throughout the region. According to the records of Eldredge (1994, 2000) of the 100 species introduced, 51 per cent were for aquaculture purposes and 21 per cent was for culture based fisheries. Commonly transferred aquatic animals were the giant clam, trochus, green snail, penaeid prawn, macrobrachium shrimp and Mozambique tilapia. Introduced species may have a severe impact at a species or ecosystems level. In turn this can impact on rural livelihoods, food security, poverty alleviation, public health and international trade. The impacts of such introductions can be caused not only the target species that are intentionally introduced but also unintended `hitchhikers'. Macro-organisms (e.g. snails, worms, larvae) and micro-organisms (parasites, bacteria and viruses) are both of concern. In the past many introductions were made without proper risks assessment. The Mozambique tilapia originally from Africa was widely introduced in the 1950's for mosquito control and/or aquaculture and is now regarded as a pest and competitor to the native fauna. In Fiji, the Japanese pond snail.
(Viviparus japonicus) was unknowingly released as larvae in the water used to transport imported grass carp. This gastropod has become a dominant benthic fauna of prawn and fishponds which has greatly reduced productivity. There are numerous hatcheries in the region. These facilities are able to artificially breed a variety of aquatic species for e.g. prawn, shrimp, giant clam, pearl oyster, tilapia and trout. The domestication of species for aquaculture usually aims to modify genetic traits such as growth rates or morphology (i.e. colour). It is the responsibility of states to ensure that such artificially propagated stocks do not significantly modify the existing wild gene pool. Aquaculture may also help to rejuvenate over-fished or threatened species (such as pearl oyster). Stocks propagated through hatchery production or culture based systems may directly increase population numbers. Aquaculture may also benefit the ecosystem by indirectly support species rejuvenation by providing alternatives to destructive fishing practices or by assisting in conservation efforts of wild broodstock and their habitat.
Article 9.4: Responsible aquaculture at the production level 9.4 Responsible aquaculture at the production level 9.4.1 States should promote responsible aquaculture practices in support of rural communities, producer organizations and fish farmers. 9.4.2 States should promote active participation of fishfarmers and their communities in the development of responsible aquaculture management practices. 9.4.3 States should promote efforts which improve selection and use of appropriate feeds, feed additives and fertilizers, including manures. 9.4.4 States should promote effective farm and fish health management practices favouring hygienic measures and vaccines. Safe, effective and minimal use of therapeutants, hormones and drugs, antibiotics and other disease control chemicals should be ensured. 9.4.5 States should regulate the use of chemical inputs in aquaculture which are hazardous to human health and the environment. 9.4.6 States should require that the disposal of wastes such as offal, sludge, dead or diseased fish, excess veterinary drugs and other hazardous chemical inputs does not constitute a hazard to human health and the environment. 9.4.7 States should ensure the food safety of aquaculture products and promote efforts which maintain product quality and improve their value through particular care before and during harvesting and on-site processing and in storage and transport of the products.
It is generally accepted that aquaculture has potential to improve the income and food security among rural communities. In the Pacific, attention among rural areas is turning to systems that require low inputs (i.e. feed) and simple culture technology. If farming is for commercial purposes then a market driven product is very important and a past lesson learn is that the venture should be profitable. Aquaculture projects that were set up for "social engineering" or political purposes rather than a sound financial basis have almost always failed. Farming at intensive levels above natural stocking densities may require a concentration of nutrients and chemical products. In the past, discharge water (for e.g from prawn farms) was implicated in eutrophication downstream. Today it is possible to achieve a zero discharge through recirculation of.
treatment systems. In New Caledonia the prawn farms are sited behind mangrove swamps which act as a natural treatment (biofilter) system. Self-regulation by the industry producers particularly for a niche market product, if it can be achieved, can be a significant step towards sustainability. Two contrasting examples demonstrate this. Firstly the highly self-regulated prawn industry in New Caledonia which has managed to sustain its position as one of the highest quality products in a highly competitive world market. In the New Caledonia industry there is an accepted code of stringent standards in feed, pond discharge, stocking and food processing. The second example is the (once) poorly regulated pearl culture industry in French Polynesia where too many farmers and bad farming practises lead to an overproduction of poor quality pearls and threatened the viability of many pearl business. ****** Abbreviations ACIAR CBD CITES CROP CTSA FAO HoF ICES JICA NACA OIE SOPAC SPADP SPC UNCLOS WSSD WTO Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Convention on Biological Diversity (UN) Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (UN) Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific Centre for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture Food and Agriculture Organization (UN) Heads of Fisheries meeting (SPC) International Council for the Exploration of the Sea Japan International Co-operation Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific International Office of Epizootics South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission South Pacific Aquaculture Development Program (FAO) Secretariat of the Pacific Community Conference on the Law of the Sea (UN) World Summit on Sustainable Development (UN) World Trade Organization.
References Dalzell, P., Adams, T. and N. Polunin. (1996). Coastal Fisheries in the Pacific Islands. UCL Press. Oceanography and Marine Biology: an annual review. Volume 34: pp395-531 Evan, N., Williams, D., and J. Raj. (2003). Review of Aquaculture Policy and Legislation in the Pacific Region. University of the South Pacific, Suva. Report (in prep) for the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea. 151p Eldredge, L.G. (1994). Perspectives in Aquatic exotic species management in the Pacific Islands. Volume.
Introduction of Commercially Significant Aquatic Organisms to the Pacific Islands. Secretariat of the Pacific Community. Noumea. (http://www.spc.org.nc/coastfish/Reports/IFRP/Introd/Eldredge.pdf) Eldredge, L.G. (2000). Non-indigenous freshwater fishes, amphibians and crustaceans of the Pacific and Hawaiian islands. in Invasive species in the Pacific: A technical review and draft regional strategy. SPREP. Samoa. FAO (2002). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. FAO Fisheries Department, Rome. 150p Gillett, R. (1997). The Importance of Tuna to Pacific Island Countries. Report prepared for the Forum Fisheries Agency. 33p ICES (2003). ICES Code of Practice on the Introductions and Transfers of Marine Organisms, 1994. Copenhagen, Denmark, International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. NACA, FAO. (2000). Aquaculture Development Beyond 2000: the Bangkok Declaration and Strategy. Conference on Aquaculture in the Third Millennium, 20-25 Feb 2000, Bangkok, Thailand. NACA and FAO, Rome. 27p Uwate, R. K., Kunataba, P., Raobati, B. and C. Tenakanai. (1984). A Review of Aquaculture Activities in the Pacific Islands Region. Pacific Islands Development Program. Honolulu, Hawaii.
Purpose, benefits and risks 1) The introduction and movement of aquatic organisms should have a clear economic, social, or environmental benefit. 2) It should also be shown why similar benefits cannot be attained by utilizing indigenous or local strain of species. The use of an indigenous species is preferable to introducing a new species. 3) Introduction and movements of aquatic organisms may lead to new and emerging pests, pathogens and diseases. Therefore, such activities may pose risks to the importing country. Risk arises from both the intended transfer species and also from pathogens, parasites and symbionts associated with this species. Risk assessment 4) Proposals for introduction and movements must be assessed from a holistic perspective, taking into account a full review of the potential hazards and an assessment of the options for mitigation. 5) The impacts to existing aquaculture operations and culture fisheries and the habitat to which the movement will be made should be considered. In addition the risks to natural ecosystem, rural livelihoods, food security, public health and trade should be taken into account. 6) When there is considerable uncertainty about the biology of the proposed species or the possible risks associated with the translocation, the Precautionary Approach should be adopted. 7) The first movement (introduction) of a new species into a new area will require special considerations in light of the risk of introducing new pests, parasites, pathogens and genetic material. Notification and engagement of stakeholders 8) Formulation of policy and legislation concerning introduction and movements should seek to engage all stakeholders in a participatory process. In addition, governments should establish advisory groups with links to independent and scientifically competent expert bodies. 9) Translocation into regions that are shared zone between two countries should be approved by relevant authorities in both territories concerned. Under such circumstances the proponent country should inform its neighbours of the intended translocation. Quarantine and release strategies 10) When introducing a new organism attention should be focused on the prevention of the spread of diseases and pests that might accompany the import through the implementation of an effective quarantine measure. 11) Quarantine measures should be based on scientific principles and be practical, cost-effective and easy to implement by utilising readily available facilities. Individual countries may need to adopt, modify or vary guidelines to suit their own particular situations and resources.
12) Movements of aquatic organisms should be conducted within the provisions given in existing relevant national and international agreements and instruments such as the United Nations FAO fisheries code of conduct and convention for biological diversity. 13) All introductions must be treated as open water stocking even if made to aquaria or closed water bodies (dams or ponds). The possibility of the species establishment into the natural environments should not be disregarded. Roles and responsibilities, capacity building and awareness raising 14) National governments have a key responsibility to manage the risks arising from the introduction and movement of aquatic organisms. This includes the responsibility to reject applications for introductions when the risks of the introduced species itself are deemed unacceptably high; and to terminate an introduction if the specimens are found to be carriers of unwanted organisms. 15) The varying capacity, special circumstances and requirements of developing countries to implement quarantine programs should be taken into account by development agencies and donor institutions. 16) Collaboration among the governments, public institutions, and the private sector, including all stakeholders, is important to achieve the full purpose of effective management of aquatic organism transfers. 17) Policy makers, enforcement agencies, stakeholders and the general public need to be made aware of issues related to, and the need for, policy on the introduction and movement of aquatic species and this should be high on national agendas.
APPENDIX L IMPLEMENTING RESPONSIBLE POST-HARVEST PRACTICES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS Erhard Ruckes97.
ABSTRACT Following a brief review of the history of the Code of Conduct and its relationship with international trade in fish and fishery products and other pertinent international arrangements related to fish trade, the paper presents the criteria embedded in the General Principles 6.7 and 6.14 of the Code. These provisions provide the basis for the requirements formulated in Article 11 which consists of three sections: 11.1 ­ Responsible fish utilization; 11.2 ­ Responsible international trade, and 11.3 ­ Laws and regulations relating to international fish trade. The right of consumers to safe, wholesome and unadulterated fish and fishery products and the need to establish and maintain effective safety and quality assurance systems for consumer protection are most important considerations for responsible fish utilization. The economic implications of the production of value-added products and the identification of the origin of fish and fishery product traded are of great relevance for producing and exporting developing countries such as the island States of the Pacific. Another high profile provision is 11.2.15 which calls on States and all relevant international cooperation and support agencies to make sure that promotion of international fish trade does not result in environmental degradation or adversely impact the nutritional rights and needs of people for whom fish is critical to their health and well-being. Of specific interest to exporting developing countries is the reference to fishing agreements and concerns related to linking access to markets to access to resources or to other criteria. The gist of provision 11.3 is that rules and regulations relating to fish trade should be transparent, as simple as possible, comprehensible, and based on scientific evidence, when appropriate. The need for cooperation and consultation between States and pertinent international organizations is emphasized specifically in the article. Attention is drawn to linkages between trade issues and other articles of the Code, e.g. articles 8, 9 and 12 and reference is made to the Technical Guidelines in support of article 11. The reports by Pacific Islands countries on the implementation of article 11 of the Code (2002) are mentioned briefly. The concluding outlook chapter highlights the core themes of fish as food and food security and trade and environment. The challenge that these subjects will constitute for the future is stressed. INTRODUCTION The intensive debates in the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) related to the large scale driftnets, the issues of shrimp and turtle, tuna and dolphin and the related trade aspects took place in the late `80s and early `90s. Following the debate on the latter at the 1990 Session of the COFI SubCommittee on Fish Trade, the COFI membership realized that a cooperative approach would be preferable to the confrontations that had been characteristic for the earlier discussions. Although the trade issues may be considered as the trigger for the development of the Code of Conduct for.
Consultant, Fish Utilization and Marketing Service, Fishery Industries Division, FAO Rome.
Responsible Fisheries, COFI decided at the outset that the Code should cover all relevant aspects of fisheries and aquaculture as they were seen in the early `90s and as they are reflected in the sequence of the Articles 7 to 12 of the Code. Article 11 dealing with post-harvest practices and trade contain provisions which refer specifically to clauses outside of FAO's direct area of responsibility and mandate, namely those of the World Trade Organization (WTO), an agency in the formative stage at the time of the formulation of the Code. Another international arrangement mentioned is the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission (Article 11.1.3) which has gained a lot more importance since the Code was approved by the FAO membership in 1995; mainly as the reference body for the application of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). However, there is one international agreement not specifically mentioned in Articles 11.2 and 11.3 and which has assumed a prominent role in aspects of international fish trade and that is the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), sometimes referred to as the Washington Convention. It is pertinent to mention these connections because they link the Code, which is voluntary in nature to binding international undertakings. GENERAL PRICIPLES There are two provisions in Article 6 of the Code dealing with general principles and which are related to the post-harvest field, namely Articles 6.7 and 6.14. These general principles say in a nutshell how fish should be handled and processed and which principles should be applied to international fish trade. The criteria highlighted in Article 6.7 are Maintaining the nutritional value Maintaining the quality Ensuring (maintaining) product safety Aiming at waste reduction Minimizing negative impacts on the environment. General principle 6.14 stipulates that: trade should be conducted in accordance with WTO rules (and those of other relevant international agreements) states should ensure that trade related policies, programmes and practices do not result in : o trade obstacles o environmental degradation or o negative social, including nutritional, impacts. These general principles are the basis for the more detailed provisions of article 11. CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 11 11.1 Article 11.1 deals with responsible fish utilization comprising fish handling, preservation processing and the use of fish and fishery products for human consumption. Therefore, the opening clauses highlight the right of consumers to safe, wholesome and unadulterated fish and fishery products and the need to establish and maintain effective safety and quality assurance systems to protect consumer health and prevent commercial fraud. Suitable standards should be set and effectively applied throughout the industry.
The use of fish for human consumption should be encouraged and whenever possible consumption be promoted; research in fish technology and projects to improve post-harvest operations should be supported. Specific emphasis is placed on the reduction of post-harvest losses and waste, including the use of bycatch, and careful use of inputs such as water and energy. Two provisions, 11.1.10 and 11.1.11 appear to have specific importance for the Pacific Islands developing countries because they require countries to cooperate in order to facilitate the production of value-added products by developing countries and to improve the identification of the origin fish and fishery products traded. Both have significant economic implications for producing and exporting countries which should aim at capitalizing on exports of value added products and products which can be traced to their origin from well managed resources and which have gone through post-harvest activities with minimal environmental impact. 11.2 Responsible international trade is the theme of Article 11.2 and it is no surprise that emphasis is put on the principles, rights and obligations established in the World Trade Organization Agreement. The main reason for this insistence is the intention to avoid the development of a parallel and possibly conflicting set of rules and provisions related to international trade. A similar line of thinking was behind the decision to adopt the output of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission (which has a Committee to deal with fish and fishery products) as the reference body for technical aspects of food trade in WTO (specifically the SPS and TBT agreements). Apart from the trade rules as developed under WTO and the call for further trade liberalization and elimination of trade barriers and distortions, there are a number of provisions which deal with the connection between trade and environment (11.2.2; 11.2.4; 11.2.9; 11.2.10; 11.2.11; 11.2.12). Environment is also one element of Article 11.2.15 which may be considered to be perhaps the most important one in this chapter. It calls not only on states but all relevant international cooperation and support agencies and organizations to make sure that promotion of international fish trade and export production does not result in environmental degradation or adversely impact the nutritional rights and needs of people for whom fish is critical to their health and well-being. This clause may also be seen as the link between the dimension of fish as food for humans in Article 11.1 and its economic importance as a trade item for the benefit of consumers. Whereas most of the provisions of Articles 11.2 and 11.3 are directed towards fish importing countries, there are three provisions which are of specific relevance to countries which export or engage in fishing agreements regulating fishing operations of foreign fleets in their waters. The Code establishes as a general principle that access to markets should not be conditioned on access to resources in Article 11.2.7. However, the article says that this principle does not preclude the possibility of fishing agreements between States which include provisions referring to access to resources, trade and access to markets, transfer of technology, scientific research, training and other relevant elements. This is also recognition of an exception to Article 11.2.8 which stipulates that access to markets should not be linked to the purchase of specific technology or sale of other products. In short, the Code establishes as principles that conditioning access to markets on access to resources and to an obligation to purchase or sell other products: however, it recognizes the freedom of States to agree on arrangements which may allow such connections. In 11.2.12 the Code expresses a possible concern by warning that States should not undermine conservation measures for living aquatic resources in order to gain trade or investment benefits. This is a reflection of the continuing responsibility of states for the sustainable exploitation of the fish resources in their waters irrespective of them being fished by outsiders.
11.3 Already in Articles 11.1 and 11.2 the importance of rules became apparent for fish as food and as an item in food trade, and in recognition of this importance a separate chapter on laws and regulations relating to fish trade was included in the Code as 11.3. Since rules and regulations can be used to hamper and distort trade, provision 11.3.1 defines their nature that they should be: transparent, as simple as possible, comprehensible, based on scientific evidence, when appropriate. Although these terms are clear and seem to make sense, they may not always be adhered to and are probably difficult to describe and define so that they could be used in an international dispute. However, they call the attention of those making the rules that there may be subjects which would find them unclear, complicated, incomprehensible and without a scientific base, where one would be needed. The latter would seem to be the terms to be used in cases of complaints. On a similar line of thinking, the Article suggests the need for consultations at national and international level, the requirement of simplification and periodic adjustment of the rules and to check whether the conditions which gave rise to the introduction of specific rules continue to exist. Article 11.3 puts heavy emphasis on a cooperative spirit in the development of rules and the need for effective communication among those concerned, particularly between countries and pertinent international organizations (11.3.8). Cooperative spirit and effective communication, at national and international levels, are the key terms of Articles 11.3. LINKS TO OTHER ARTICLES OF THE CODE Article 11 is not an isolated part of the Code but its provisions have links and implications for other chapters albeit in a complementary fashion. For illustration purposes some examples of Articles 8, 9 and 12 are provided. ARTICLE 8 (FISHING OPERATIONS) In clause 8.4.4 the adoption of appropriate technology for the best use and care of the retained catch is stipulated. This is essential for the maintenance of a level of product quality which through the subsequent marketing stages will allow the consumer to acquire products of the quality he/she desires. In 8.4.5 the reduction of discards is addressed which is a link to 11.1.8 which requires the reduction of post-harvest losses and the use of bycatch. Article 8.8 deals with the protection of the atmosphere and the need to reduce ozone depleting substances which may be used in refrigeration systems and therefore, it is important for the processing industry and providers of ice and cold storage in the distribution system. ARTICLE 9 (AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT) In Article 9.4.7 food safety of aquaculture products and the promotion of efforts which maintain product quality and to improve the value of aquaculture output are specifically mentioned thus establishing the link to Article 11. However, it is necessary to mention that many provisions of Article 11 need to be taken into account in the promotion of aquaculture development and that the concerns of both articles need to be addressed when preparing relevant plans. There are examples that not all concerned are aware of this link and it may be mainly producers which concentrate on production issues.
ARTICLE 12 (FISHERIES RESEARCH) There are three provisions in Article 12 addressing fisheries research which are pertinent to fish as food and, therefore, constitute a link to Article 11. Under 12.7 research is encouraged to ensure optimum utilization of fishery resources as well as research to support national policies related to fish as food. Research into and monitoring of human food supplies from aquatic sources and the environment from which they are taken is required according to Article 12.8 in order to ensure that there is no adverse health impact on consumers. In a more generic way Article 12.9 provides that the economic, social, marketing and institutional aspects of fisheries are adequately researched (and that comparable data are generated for ongoing monitoring, analysis and policy formulation). TECHNICAL GUIDELINES Volume 7 of the FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries relate to responsible fish utilization, i. e. to Article 11.1. This publication provides annotation to and guidance on the provisions of this article and is aiming at assisting those charged with the implementation of the Code to identify possible courses of action necessary to ensure that the industry is conducted in a sustainable manner. They are directed particularly towards the post-harvest sector of the fish producing industry. Three major areas of responsibility are identified which the industry is expected to honour: Responsibility to the consumer of the food, to ensure that it is safe to eat, is of expected quality and nutritional value, Responsibility to the resource, to ensure that it is not wasted and Responsibility to the environment, to ensure that negative impacts are minimized. In addition the industry has the self-evident responsibility to itself to ensure the continued ability of many millions of people throughout the world to earn a gainful living from working within the industry. The preparation of Technical Guidelines related to Articles 11.2 and 11.3 has not been accomplished yet. Concerns by parts of the FAO membership which feared that such guidelines would paraphrase the existing text of the Code and possibly introduce biased interpretations, or else undermine the validity of the WTO texts for which the FAO has no mandate initially caused a delay in addressing the task. Subsequent drafts were brought to the attention of the COFI Sub-Committee on Fish Trade in 1998 and a final draft was produced in 2000. However, the text followed very closely the formulation of the Code itself and in a number cases there were no specific explanations of the provisions of the Code, because the original text was considered self-explanatory; perhaps because the drafters were experts in legal texts and formulations and did not see an additional benefit by describing the context of the individual provisions. REPORTS BY SOUTH WEST PACIFIC COUNTRIES ON THE CCRF IMPLEMENTATION The Progress Report on the Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and Related Plans of Action presented to the FAO Committee on Fisheries at its 25th Session in February 2003 included replies from 10 countries in the Southwest Pacific (Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu). A summary of the results for the region as a whole is presented below. PRIORITIES The objective of the Code "Promote the contribution of fisheries to food security and food quality giving priority to the nutritional needs of local communities" was rated by six countries as extremely relevant; one reply denoted it as relevant and another three between relevant and extremely relevant. Similarly distributed were the replies received for the objective "Promote trade in fish and fishery products in conformity with relevant international rules".
The prioritization of the various themes of the Code resulted in top priority by 6 countries for postharvest practices, three indicated priority and one reply said low priority. In this case the picture for trade differed and four countries deemed it top priority and six a priority. PROBLEMS The questionnaire on which the survey was based carried two questions related to the post-harvest and trade area but not all Southwest Pacific countries replied. Of the nine FAO members questioned whether they were with or without an effective food safety and quality assurance system for fish and fishery products, five replied positive and four no. The question whether the origin of fish and fishery products can be identified in the country, six said processors could and one that they could not. Regarding consumers it was reported that they could identify the origin in three countries, but five said they could not. This situation would indicate needs for action in the area of food safety and consumer protection as well as the traceability of the origin of products or raw materials. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SPC HEADS OF FISHERIES MEETING (AUGUST 2003) PERTINENT TO ARTICLE 11 Introduced species Live reef fisheries Improving quality and value of fisheries exports.
OUTLOOK Fish as Food and Food Security The emphasis which the code gives to fish as food in Article 11 will continue to stay important and may even become more prominent with economic growth and rising awareness of the benefits of fish consumption for human health increasing over time. Access to fish supplies could become a bottleneck for lower income groups, if no means are developed to make relatively cheap products available to these groups of consumers. At any rate, the use of fish as human food will maintain a priority position and may expand its prominence in the further development of international discussions related to the human right to food. At this stage, I would like to add a few remarks to a work in progress in relation to international trade in fishery products and how it can be managed so as to limit harm done to food security and contribute to strengthening food security, especially for the poor. So far, the work concentrates on the principles that should guide the management of fish trade in relation to concern for food security. The core principle proposed is food sovereignty as part of national sovereignty. This responsibility of national governments implies the obligation to respect and avoid any action which would harm food security. A further obligation is to protect, i.e. action should be taken to prevent others from harming food security (e.g. preventing trade that would endanger customary supplies of fish, especially for the poor). The obligation to fulfil means action to facilitate people in achieving food security by creating the conditions that people can provide for themselves. In the view of the author98, it is important to formulate explicit norms for performance of States, business enterprises and international agencies and to make international arrangements to ensure the implementation of these norms. It is too early to say whether this work will lead to a codification of some sort and which institutional arrangements will be pursued in this regard.
Professor Georges Kent, University of Hawaii.
Trade and Environment Mutually Supportive Environmental concerns are increasingly raised in international discussions related to fisheries and aquaculture. Apart from the frequent mentions in the present text of the Code, the International Plans of Action for Sharks and Seabirds are further evidence of this tendency. Another, in a sense parallel trend is the application of trade measures for environmental reasons and in this context the importance which CITES has gained over the past ten years for fish species is a significant example. It will be remembered that the Rio Conference on the Environment and Development requested FAO to formulate a Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries; so it had an environmental angle right from the start. Agenda 21 of the Rio Declaration stipulates that trade and environment should be mutually supportive and it will be one of the major challenges of the future to establish this link in an operationally effective way. It is apparent that issues of international fish trade are being discussed in a multitude of international fora and there are indications that this process will intensify further. Since fish resources contribute such an important share to the economic wealth of the South Pacific countries, it is essential that their governments make sure that their voices are heard and their interests taken care of in these discussions. It must be remembered that the international rules are negotiated and only an informed participation in these negotiations can ensure appropriate reflection of the countries of the South Pacific, their peoples' and specifically their fishers', processors', traders' and consumers' needs and rights.
APPENDIX M INTEGRATING FISHERIES INTO COASTAL MANAGEMENT IN PACIFIC SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES Mary Power99 and Liz Dovey100.
ABSTRACT The coastal area - the interface between the land and the sea, brings together two very different, complex and yet highly interrelated ecosystems that together produce and maintain the natural resource benefits upon which much of our island communities depend. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are increasingly subject to a range of human activities that pose very significant threats to their long-term sustainability. The marine and coastal environmental issues facing the Pacific Region are similar to other parts of the world. The most serious of these issues are the loss of biodiversity, solid and liquid waste management, over-exploitation of living resources and destructive harvesting practices, introduction of alien species and destruction of habitat and coastal degradation due to poor land practices that lead to pollution and siltation. Other driving forces throughout the region include high population growth generally but specifically in urban areas due to urban drift, and a shift from subsistence to cash economies. Globally, overfishing has led to dramatic declines in coastal fish stocks. The picture in the Pacific is less clear but it is clear that there has been little focus on the status and management of inshore fisheries at the national level until quite recently as attention in the fisheries sector has been focused on expanding foreign income earnings from the lucrative oceanic tuna fisheries. Maintaining the integrity of coastal ecosystems and protection of biodiversity in these ecosystems is challenging because of the great range of biological, physical and socio-economic pressures involved, as well as the complexity of sectoral and institutional arrangements. ICM is a comprehensive, multisectoral and integrated approach to the planning and management of coastal areas. Article 10 concerns the Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Management in order to assist in achieving the rational and sustainable use of scarce coastal resources. It addresses the issue of how the fisheries sector can be integrated into integrated coastal management planning so that interactions between the fisheries sector and other sectors can be taken into account in the establishment of management policy and practice with regard to the sustainable use of coastal resources. This paper provides an overview of the broad principles of ICM and Article 10 of the Code of Conduct, takes a look at the status of ICM and coastal fisheries management in the Pacific currently and explores how coastal fisheries management in the Pacific can be integrated into broader management and planning for sustainable use of Pacific island coastal resources, in line with the principles enshrined in Article 10. INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW The coastal area - the interface between the land and the sea, brings together two very different, complex and yet highly interrelated ecosystems. Together they form the coastal ecosystem that produces and maintains a huge number of natural resource benefits upon which much of our island communities depend. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are increasingly subject to a range of human activities that pose very significant threats to their long-term sustainability. The marine and coastal.
Coastal Management Adviser, SPREP.
Invasive Species and Bird Conservation Officer, SPREP.
environmental issues facing the Pacific Region are similar to other parts of the world. The most serious of these issues are the loss of biodiversity, solid and liquid waste management, overexploitation of living resources and destructive harvesting practices, introduction of alien species and destruction of habitat and coastal degradation due to poor land practices that lead to pollution and siltation. Other driving forces throughout the region include high population growth generally but specifically in urban areas due to urban drift, and a shift from subsistence to cash economies. Marine fisheries are one of the remaining examples of human economic activities involving the direct exploitation of wild animal populations. Globally, poorly planned use of coastal resources is perhaps most apparent in the fishing sector, where overfishing due to perverse incentives stemming from illdefined ownership rights has led to dramatic declines in coastal fish stocks. In the Gulf of Thailand, for example, the biomass of valuable demersal species is now only 10% of original unfished levels. A 50% reduction in fishing effort, and the passage of many years, is required to rehabilitate these stocks to optimum productive levels (Pauly et al. 1998, 2000). The picture in the Pacific is less clear. There has been little focus on the status and management of inshore fisheries at the national level until quite recently as all attention in the fisheries sector has been focused on managing to expand the foreign earnings export dollars from the lucrative oceanic tuna fisheries Fisheries are dependent on the productivity of the marine ecosystem, and fisheries have an effect on, and are affected by, the supporting ecosystem of the target species. It therefore follows that prudent and responsible fisheries management should take account of the interactions between fisheries and their supporting ecosystem. There is an obvious need therefore to consider the development and management of the coastal fisheries sector within the context of management and development planning for the broader coastal ecosystem, i.e., in the context of the protection and management of the resources, the environment and the activities of the coastal area. However, maintaining the integrity of coastal ecosystems and protection of biodiversity in these ecosystems is challenging because of the great range of biological, physical and socio-economic pressures involved. Management is further complicated because of the numerous institutions (or in some instances, the lack of) and interests that are interconnected and must be considered during the problem solving process. Responsibility for managing the many relevant activities is frequently divided among different national and local institutions. Often this occurs along sectoral lines. The result is that one institution's actions may have significant adverse impacts on the resources of another. Thus in addition to the problem of remote causes and effects, there may be little opportunity or incentive for inter-agency cooperation that could avoid or minimize the externalities. These ecological, social and institutional complexities and the multifaceted character of many of the issues that need to be dealt with to ensure the sustainable use of coastal and marine resources demands we adopt an holistic approach to management. The term originally usually used to describe such an approach was `integrated coastal zone management' (ICZM) but the terms integrated coastal management (ICM) and "integrated coastal area management (ICAM) are also commonly used depending on the legal and institutional frameworks in place. All these terms refer to essentially the same thing: a comprehensive, multi-sectoral, integrated approach to the planning and management of coastal areas. The use of "zone", and more recently "area", were developed for the continental situation, such as in the United States and Europe, with large landmasses, where their legislative systems define their coasts as a distinct area. In the small island situation like the Pacific, this description is generally inappropriate as usually the whole island, in environmental terms, is coastal, so we generally refer to "Integrated Coastal Management". Article 10 in the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries concerns the Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Management in order to assist in achieving the rational and sustainable use of scarce coastal resources (FAO 1995, pp26-27 & 2001). It addresses the issue of how the fisheries sector can be integrated into integrated coastal management planning so that interactions between the fisheries sector and other sectors can be taken into account in the establishment of management policy and practice with regard to the sustainable use of coastal resources.
This paper provides an overview of the broad principles of ICM and Article 10 of the Code of Conduct, takes a look at the status of ICM and coastal fisheries management in the Pacific currently and explores how coastal fisheries management in the Pacific can be integrated into broader management and planning for sustainable use of Pacific island coastal resources, in line with the principles enshrined in Article 10. INTEGRATED COASTAL MANAGEMENT Integrated Coastal Management (ICM) is a participatory and integrated planning process for addressing complex issues of conserving biological diversity in coastal and marine ecosystems. This approach was first formally recognized globally in Agenda 21 of the Earth Summit on Environment and Development 1992. Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 provides a prescription for improved management and protection of ocean and marine space including: 17.10. The role of international cooperation and coordination on a bilateral basis and, where applicable, within a subregional, interregional, regional or global framework, is to support and supplement national efforts of coastal States to promote integrated management and sustainable development of coastal and marine areas. 17.22 (c) Integrate protection of the marine environment into relevant general environmental, social and economic development policies; The Conference of Parties (COP) to the Convention on Biological Diversity at their second meeting in Jakarta in November 1995, acknowledged "integrated coastal and marine management as the most suitable strategy for strategic management of human impacts on marine and coastal biological diversity and for promoting conservation and sustainable use of this biological diversity". The Subsidiary Body (of the CBD) for Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA) defines ICM as: ".. the participatory process for decision making to prevent, control, or mitigate adverse impacts from human activities in the marine and coastal environment, and to contribute to the restoration of degraded coastal areas. It involves all stakeholders, including: decision makers in the public and private sectors; resource owners, managers and users; non-governmental organizations; and the general public." More recently, at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), the issue of the need to adopt an ecosystem approach to oceans management and to establish networks of marine protected areas was added to the agenda but without superceding Agenda 21. Chapter 7 of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation addresses specifically sustainable development of Small Island Developing States, including includes target dates for waste and pollution prevention, community based initiatives, environmentally sound energy supply and services, and a focus on fisheries, fresh water, pollution prevention, tourism, disaster preparedness, vulnerability, climate change, community development. In the Pacific Small Island context all of these issues pertain to the coast and can only be address through the adoption of an ICM approach. The Plan identified a number of actions in the area of institutional policies that would bolster its implementation, and highlighted the strengthening of national and regional capacity in marine science and management, as required action. ICM involves planning for multiple uses based on the precautionary approach and ecosystem management principles. It tries to respond to the reality that terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems and human impacts on them are intricately inter-woven (Clark 1992). Ideally, ICM extends from the upper reaches of coastal watersheds to adjacent offshore systems and thus is related to the ecosystem-based concepts of integrated coastal watershed management and large marine ecosystem management and ecosystem-based fisheries management generally.
ICM requires an institutional framework that provides the appropriate linkages between national, regional and local authorities. There is a spectrum of approaches that can be adopted to deliver ICM. In the simplest form, an existing agency may be given a mandate to initiate cross-sectoral coastal planning but with no additional responsibilities or powers. Further along the spectrum, a framework could be established under which the different agencies involved in coastal management retain all their responsibilities but co-ordinate their planning and actions through a central body of some sort, such as a Coastal Advisory Committee. Finally, countries may adopt a truly integrated approach within which much of the responsibility for planning and the allocation of coastal resources is undertaken by an integrated institution such as a Coastal Management Division or Unit operating under specific Coastal Management legislation. This iintegration of management and decision-making processes is what defines ICM from other sectoral strategies for natural resource management. Pacific Island countries have also all ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) (UNEP 1991) which in turn reflects the integrated, ecosystems management approach put forward in Agenda 21 and reinforced in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation from the WSSD in 2002. FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES AS IT RELATES TO ICM The Code of Conduct per se will have been introduced to you in great detail at this meeting by now so the following will explore only Article 10. Article 10 concerns the Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Management in order to "assist in achieving the rational use of scarce coastal resources" (FAO 1995). Article 10 of the Code has four main component areas as describe below: 10.1 Institutional frameworks: The Code stresses the need for appropriate institutional arrangements to: achieve the sustainable and integrated use of resources taking into account the fragility and finite nature of coastal ecosystems; take account of the interests of the fishing sector; adopt fisheries practices that avoid or minimize conflicts with other users in the coastal zone and to put conflict resolution arrangements in place. States are also urged to determine the range of possible uses of coastal resources and to govern access to them taking into consideration the rights of local fishing communities and customary practices. 10.2 Policy measures: States are encouraged to create public awareness about the need for integrated management in the coastal zone taking account of relevant economic, social and cultural factors. Risks and uncertainties should be identified and assessed, monitoring systems adopted, and multidisciplinary research facilitated. 10.3 Regional cooperation: The Code supports regionalisation and encourages States to cooperate regionally and sub-regionally in the management of the coastal zone to take into account the transboundary nature of some of the impacts. Information sharing on a timely basis and notification of events is considered a key factor in this cooperative arrangement. 10.4 Implementation: Appropriate national mechanisms should be established to facilitate effective coastal zone planning and that fisheries interests are adequately represented. A key factor is to ensure that national agencies, and the fisheries sector in particular, must have appropriate technical capabilities. FAO has developed a set of comprehensive guidelines for Article 10, FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries - Integration of fisheries into coastal area management, No.3. (FAO 1996) which you have in your workshop papers and which should be read in conjunction with this paper. These guidelines provide detailed discussion on the above four areas of Article 10, providing suggestions and guidance on how States may generically approach the implementation of this Article of the Code.
However, for the purpose of this meeting it would be more beneficial to look at the state of ICM and coastal fisheries management in Pacific Island Countries and, in the context of Article 10, the integration of fisheries management into ICM in the context of Pacific Small Island Developing States. STATUS OF ICM AND OF COASTAL FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS REGION Coastal Fisheries Management A main characteristic of the coastal fisheries sector in the Pacific islands is that it is mainly small scale and localized, pursued by Pacific Islanders using subsistence, artisanal, or small-scale fishing methods within the nearshore. The fishery is generally characterized by: Multispecies reef and lagoon food fisheries for domestic, mainly subsistence consumption; Small-scale commercial fisheries outside the reef, either for deep-slope demersal species or for larger pelagic species, including tuna, and mainly for export; Narrowly-targeted reef fisheries for high-value exports (e.g. sea-cucumber)(SPC 1999) While the absolute value of landings from the Pacific Islands coastal fisheries sector is small comparative to the oceanic fisheries sector, it is the coastal fisheries nonetheless which underpin current livelihoods and continued food security in most Pacific Island countries. Unlike the tuna fisheries, almost the entire value of the coastal fishery accrues to Pacific Islanders themselves, and is the main source of cash and subsistence for many rural communities. Apart from the significance to the rural economy, coastal fisheries are also the main source of protein nutrition and underpin many aspects of society and culture (Dalzell et al 1996). Despite the enormous importance of the coastal fishery sector to the well-being of Pacific Island communities, the sector is characterized by a remarkable lack of information necessary for governments and communities to make decisions about the management and state of the reef fisheries under their control (SPC 1991). Consequently there have been little or no direct management interventions at either the local or national level until quite recently. An international law specialist101 and regional agency legal advisor based in the region, quoted in Connell (2003), summed it up very succinctly: "It is not necessary for everyone to fully appreciate the significance of any activity in the economy. However, when that lack of appreciation extends to policymakers, planners, and development agencies, it can mean that fisheries development (and management one would also assume) receives lower priority than it deserves". And "Any discussion of fisheries resource management in the Pacific Islands region cannot be insulated from the larger issue of resource management generally because of the nexus between the two..... It has long been recognized that it is not enough to simply manage the fisheries resources without endeavouring to also take care of the environment that the fisheries resources inhabit. This calls for integrated management, which encompasses proper controls over activities, such as those that are land-based but which nonetheless impact on the fisheries resource. And.
Transform Aqorau, (undated version) " Legal and Policy Issues in Fisheries Management in the Pacific Islands Region.
Thus, the exploitation of fisheries resources is the only significant economic activity common throughout the region. Its proper management is not only crucial to particular sectors of communities within the islands; in some cases, it is vital to the wellbeing of the entire nation. This lack of information and associated lack of awareness by decision and policy makers is now being addressed by the EU funded PORCFISH program being undertaken by SPC and there are an increasing number of local, community-based fisheries management projects appearing in country. This will have implications for future management. As the total Pacific Island human population has doubled in size over the last 30 years, requiring more food and producing more pollution, and as the cash economy breaks down the traditional fabric of community life, reef and lagoon fisheries are becoming increasingly difficult to maintain at sustainable levels, either by governments or communities. If sustainable, long-term benefit is to be ensured, Pacific Island countries will need to adopt socially and biologically-appropriate mechanisms for managing existing nearshore (mainly coral reef) fisheries and this can only be achieved by the adoption of an integrated management approach underpinned by ecosystem based principles. In this context the fisheries sector is really no different to any other sector relying on access to and use of coastal resources. ICM in the Pacific Despite numerous regional and national initiatives targeting coastal resource management, the situation with regard to integrated coastal management in many Pacific Island countries is not encouraging. The management responses from Pacific Island Countries have been hampered by an overall lack of appropriate legislation for ICM, and in many cases, insufficient capacity to implement existing sectoral management strategies (SPREP 1995). Responsibility for management of human interaction with the coastal environment is still predominantly sectorally based. Few, if any, countries outside of the US territories have specific Coastal Management Legislation or Integrated Coastal Management Plans. In many instances, there is not just a lack of cooperation between the agencies traditionally responsible for management of activities in the coastal area such as Fisheries, Environment, Board of Works and Planning Departments, but often active competition for both financial resources and management roles, complicated further by overlapping and sometimes conflicting legislation. In general, this has led to the inability of governing institutions to identify the multiple problems prevailing in the coastal environment and to provide an integrated solution, particularly at the local level. The principal causes of institutional failure are: 1) inadequate legal and policy support; 2) lack of technical `know-how' on the part of managers; 3) poor co-ordination among sectoral agencies, often exacerbated by lack of political will to make the necessary reforms and 4) inadequate or nonexistent involvement of other stakeholders and local community in the decision making process. WHAT CAN WE DO TO IMPROVE THE SITUATION? The Pacific Islands have a unique social fabric that puts us in a strong position in terms of our capacity to effectively achieve integrated management of our fragile coastal ecosystems. Fortunately, traditional marine tenure is still strong in most PICs. This can be an immense advantage if these traditional systems are integrated, where appropriate, into ICM activities as it aids in developing ownership and thereby ensuring sustainability of management interventions (Huber & McGregor 2001). Thanks largely to this strong customary marine tenure, domestic food fisheries in particular are still in good shape compared to reef fisheries in most other parts of the world, but they have little further commercial expansion potential and are facing a potentially bleak future in the absence of effective.
intervention (SPC 1999). Recent experiences, such as the activities supported under the program of the Locally Managed Marine Area Network of SPREP / USP/ FSPI and others in Fiji, Solomons and PNG, the AUSAID Samoa and Tonga fisheries management projects, the Samoa-IUCN-World Bank-MPA program and other national and regional projects suggest that effective action based on the right principles can maintain them that way, for the benefit of subsistence food security and continued rural income generation. When we consider the factors presented above, fragmented governance, poor legal and institutional frameworks but strong traditional tenure systems, it is obvious that we need to take a "three dimensional or three track" approach to coastal management (and coastal fisheries) in the region if we are to succeed in maintaining healthy coastal environments and sustaining coastal fisheries. To achieve sustained progress we must simultaneously work at: (1) local-level site based management programs, with full involvement of, and ownership by, local communities and (2) establishing frameworks and a policy environment at the higher levels that forge links between local and national government and (3) bringing about integration at national and regional levels between sectors and disciplines. In other words we need a combination of both "top-down" and "bottom-up" management measures and we need to strive for both "vertical" and "horizontal" integration at the all levels. The "top-down" approach reflects the usual focus / functioning of national government along with its institutions and procedures. This centralized approach assumes that if the "regulate and control" capacity of central government is properly tuned then proper measures for natural resource management will be successful. A recent comparative study of coastal resource management in the Pacific has shown that this is not the case (World Bank 2000). The study found that "few national regulations were found to be relevant at local level" and therefore to have on impact on the management of local marine resources. The "bottom-up" approach emphasizes activities at the local community level that engage the local resources owners directly in management, i.e. Community-Based Coastal Resource Management (CBCRM). However, to be successful it is essential that these activities are truly owned and driven by the community (World Bank 2000, King & Fa'asili 2001). This is especially relevant to coastal fisheries management in the Pacific island context. As Doulman (1993) points out, "the conventional approach to fisheries management usually pits the manager and managed against each other in an adversarialtype relationship". This can be avoided where the fishers are actively involved in the decision making process and are in fact themselves the actual managers of the fishery. Such community-based activities not only build a stewardship ethic among resource owners but may often also catalyze action within the rest of the system. For instance, the IUCN MPA program in Samoa resulted in the establishment of District Committees to integrate marine resource management across multiple villages. These District Committees have now begun to function as an effective lobby to National Government to secure additional benefits which have relevance at both local and national levels, such as improved roads and new legislation regarding sand mining and other destructive activities in the coastal environment (Sue Miller pers com) and may eventually bring about the banning, under fisheries regulations, of the destructive practice of night scuba fishing which has been banned in the MPAs. The third dimension is integration between sectors and disciplines and at all levels. The key to marrying these "bottom-up" and "top-down" approaches is to have "vertical" integration from local communities and the associated local (formal and / or informal) governance to the national level governance. To illustrate this, a "surprising" finding of the World Bank study was the "perceived high compliance with national rules adopted locally by traditional leaders" into either formal or informal traditional systems where it was perceived that compliance was much greater than to either purely local or purely national level rules and regulations.
The other form of integration required is "horizontal" integration, i.e. integration between sectors and disciplines. It is unusual for one agency alone to have all the expertise necessary to meet the challenges of complex coastal or aquatic resource management and biodiversity issues given the number of overlying interests and institutional jurisdictions. Success requires collaboration and partnerships between various government institutions, universities, NGOs, and those with the financial and technical assistance. The three-track strategy combines these approaches by simultaneously and incrementally building awareness, knowledge and capacity both within government (national and local) and at community level sites. Both government and communities then are involved in the systematic analysis of coastal management issues and in planning for implementation of responsible action. This approach creates dialogue that promotes a common vision and shared purpose. Joining the user and the manager provides opportunities for groups to meet face to face and to develop a common respect and understanding. Involving the coastal users and understanding their perception of management actions helps to make the decision-making process more efficient. Engaging local communities gives the community a sense of ownership and provides continuity as on-going activities become is less susceptible to the continuous changes in personnel and political agenda that occur within national governments. IN THE CONTEXT OF ICM AND ARTICLE 10, WHAT DO WE NEED? In the ideal scenario, we need a National Coastal and Ocean Management Plan that integrates all relevant institutions, takes a "ridge-top to EEZ" focus and has full political support and commitment. As impossible as this may seem, it has already been achieved to a degree in American Samoa. In August 2003 the American S moan Governor Togiolo T. A. Tulafono signed Executive Order No. 0042003, formally establishing the Ocean Resource Management Process and Plan. This document provides a structure for managing American S moa's marine resources in a manner that balances ecological, economic, and cultural needs. It is a living document, in that it is designed to evolve and change with time (Hamnett et al 2003). I think this extract from the Executive Summary to the Plan brings together perfectly many of the issues discussed above: "While American S moa shares many of the ocean-related management issues facing the contiguous states, it also has concerns unique to tropical island states and territories. The entire territory is within the coastal zone, and each of its watersheds empties directly into the ocean. ... Population growth and the corresponding development in the coastal zone are also critical issues, Tualauta County in American S moa is expected to more than double its 1990 population of 14,724 by the year 2015. ..American S moa's fisheries, ... In near-shore waters the subsistence level and traditional fishermen are catching fewer and smaller fish, while on the high seas many nations are reliant on a tuna and albacore stock of unknown size...... It is the strength of fa`as moa, however, the traditional S moan way, that truly distinguishes the territory. Villages in American S moa, like other island societies in the Pacific, are based on localized social systems in which family leadership [matai] and village councils [fono-a-matai] manage local resources in a communal manner. But contemporary S moa is a society in transition, and many villages now demonstrate a mix of private property and communal perspectives. Fa`as moa creates a planning context that is unique among the nation's states and territories. On the positive side, the islands have a long history of consensus decision making, a strong village leadership that offers potential for community based resource management, and a culture that nominally espouses an environmental ethos. The culture also presents resource managers with distinctive challenges. Some feel that government-.
run programs conflict with tradition. In particular, many in the territory view land ownership as absolute ­ i.e., that no person or agency has the right to tell any family how they can and cannot use their land. A variety of efforts have been undertaken to better manage American S moa's ocean and ocean-related resources, and many comprehensive resource management plans exist. Significant plans and programs currently include the Coral Reef Management Plan, the Non-Point Source Pollution Control Program, the Watershed Protection Plan, the Port Master Plan, the Five Year Fisheries Management Plan, and the Village Based Community Fisheries Plan. This proposal outlines a means for integrating existing resource management efforts under a five-year Ocean Resource Management Plan for American S moa. Plan development ..... .... found that American S moa already has a comprehensive set of plans that directly and indirectly protect the marine environment, and that there were very few programmatic gaps in these plans. The weak link was plan implementation. Each agency faced a similar set of difficulties caused by limited funding, personnel, and resources. Enforcing existing regulations was another universal concern ... then decided that the ORMP would not present a new list of programs for each agency to follow, but would rather focus on developing a structure for coordinating and integrating existing resource management plans .....then reviewed existing state and international ocean policy regimes to see if there was a model applicable to American S moa. While many good ideas came out of this, the final model for the Ocean Plan came from the territory itself" This is obviously what all Pacific SIDS need to be striving for, an integrating mechanism appropriate to the prevailing cultural, socio-economic and environmental conditions prevailing in the particular country. Integrated coastal management must be seen as a long-term approach in Pacific SIDS. Many of you will consider that true integrated institutional approaches are unlikely in the foreseeable future. However, in the interim, we can take realistic and practical measures. What is needed immediately is improved institutional coordination both horizontally (across sectors) and vertically (local-provincialnational). This can be achieved at relatively low cost and with minimal institutional re-structuring provided there is individual and political will. In this context, key requirements to create an enabling environment in the shorter term for ICM and CB-CRM (including fisheries) in the Pacific Region includes: and clear national regulations (fishery and other) that are relevant to communities and can be adopted in local ordinances (A 10.1, A 10.2, 10.4 of the Code). An integration mechanism (e.g. National Planning Committee, Coastal Advisory Committees, Sustainable Development Committee etc) to coordinate across responsible institutions and multiple legislations (A 10.1, A 10.2, 10.4 of the Code). Conflict resolution and equitable access and allocation arrangements need to be in place where use pressures make spatial separation of users an impossibility (A 10.1, A 10.2). An enabling a framework / environment that facilitates the adoption and enforcement of local rules (A 10.1, A 10.2, 10.4). Awareness programs aimed at local and national leaders as well as resource owners and all groups within the community (men, women, school children) (10.2). Provision of assistance to communities on technical aspects of resource management (10.1, 10.4). Inter-sectoral collaboration to address land-based threats to coastal habitats (A 10.1, A 10.2, 10.4). Recognition of MPA as a potential management tool for inshore fisheries (10.2).
commitment to the process by individuals within both community and government and support and commitment from the political system and individual institutions (A 10.1, A 10.2, 10.4).
In the regional context and supporting 10.3 of Article 10, the development and adoption of the Pacific Islands Regional Ocean Policy (PIROP) (CROP MSWG 2002) and its presentation of the at the World Conference on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg in 2002 provides a set of guiding principles for countries moving towards development of National Oceans (&Coastal) Management Plans. The vision underlying the principles set out in the Policy speaks of "A healthy Ocean (and Coasts) that sustains the livelihoods and aspirations of the Pacific Island Communities". This should be the vision of all of us who have responsibility for managing the regions valuable marine and coastal resources. ***** REFERENCES Campbell J, Townsley P. 1996 Participatory and Integrated Policy. A Framework for Small-Scale Fisheries. Integrated Marine Management UK. Clark, John R. 1992. Integrated management of coastal zones. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 327. FAO. Connell M. 2003 Constraints Affecting the Implementation of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in the Pacific Island States: A Report to the Forum Fisheries Agency and other Pacific Regional Agencies (Internal Report Forum Secretariat). Council of Regional Organisations of the Pacific ­ Marine Sector Working Group 2002 Pacific Regional Oceans Policy, Forum Secretariat, Suva Fiji. Dalzell, P., Adams, T.J.H. & Polunin, N.V.C. (1996). Coastal fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Oceanography and Marine Biology: an Annual Review 34: 395-531. Doulman D.J. 1993 Community Based Fishery Management. Towards restoration of traditional practices in the South Pacific. Marine Policy, March 1993 Butterworth-Heinmann Ltd. Food & Agricultural Organisation 1995 Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, FAO Rome Food & Agricultural Organisation 1996 FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries Integration of fisheries into coastal area management. No.
Rome, 17p. FAO Fishery Development Planning Service, Fisheries Department. Food & Agricultural Organisation 2001 What is the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. FAO Rome Hamnett M, Anderson C. L., Cain S M 2003, American S moa Ocean Resource Management Plan. The Social Science Research Institute University of Hawai`i at M noa Huber, M & McGregor, K. 2001 A Synopsis of Information Relating to Marine Protected Areas in the Pacific Islands Region ­ Review for The Strategic Action Programme for International Waters of the Pacific Islands Region (IWP) SPREP/UNEP. King M., Fa'asili U 1996 A network of small, community owned marine reserves in Western Samoa. Parks 8 (2).
Secretariat of the Pacific Community 1999 Project proposal - South pacific region comparative assessment of reef Fisheries project. Secretariat of the Pacific Community (marine resources division, coastal fisheries programme) October 1999 Pauly, D., V. Christensen, J. Dalsgaard, R. Froese and F. Torres, Jr. 1998. Fishing down the food webs. Science, 279:860-863. Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese and M.L. Palomares. 2000. Fishing down aquatic food webs. American Scientist, 88:46-51. South Pacific Regional Environment Program 1995. Report of the Sub-Regional Meetings to Identify Coastal Management Training Needs. Pago-Pago, American Samoa, 18 ­ 19 July 1994; Saipan, Northern Mariana Islands, 25 ­ 26 July, 1994; Honiara, Solomon Islands, 1 ­ 2 August, 1994. ii + 53 pp. United Nations Environment Program 1991 The Law of the Sea and the South Pacific United Nations Environment Program and the International Oceans Institute. World Bank 1999 Summary Report. Voices from the Village. A Comparative Study of Coastal Resource Management in the Pacific Islands. Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series No: 9A World Bank 2000 Summary Report. Voices from the Village. A Comparative Study of Coastal Resource Management in the Pacific Islands. Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series No: 9B.
APPENDIX N ROLE PLAYING: MAKING RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS ABOUT FISHERIES.
CASE 1 Situation: In a typical fishing village somewhere in the Pacific Islands. Problem: Two adjacent fishing villages are in a dispute over declining fish catches. Both villages practice customary management of in-shore resources but each village is blaming the other for the declining state of resources. Measures to address the problem: The village leaders have requested intervention by the Department of Fisheries and both villages have indicated their willingness to abide by a decision reached in consultation with the Chief Fisheries Officer. Action: The Chief Fisheries Officer visits the villages. He requests each village leader to make a case in respect of his/her village. The Fisheries Officer will then provide recommendations for the solutions of the problem, taking into consideration all relevant information and particularly the need to ensure that resources are utilized in a responsible manner. Time allocation: 1.5 hours of which: 15 minutes is allocated to consultation between each village leader and his/her fellow villagers; 15 minutes for each leader to make a case concerning the problems being faced with respect to the declines in resource productivity. The leaders should focus on the severity of the problem, its social and economic impacts, why the problem have arisen and what action should be taken; 15 minutes for the Chief Fisheries Officer to respond to the arguments made by the two village leaders and to propose recommendations to solve the dispute, and 30 minutes for group participation to comment on the argument made by each of the village leaders and the appropriateness of the recommendations suggested by the Chief Fisheries Officer. These comments should be constructive and positive, taking into account the need to secure long-term sustainability in fisheries.
CASE 2 Situation: Small-scale tuna fishers are opposing a plan by the Government to license 150 small to medium longline vessels from a foreign country. These foreign vessels would not be based at ports in the country and would pay an access fee only to the Government for the right to fish within the country's exclusive economic zone. Problem: The small-scale tuna fishers' organizations maintain that some of the smaller foreign longline vessels will fish up to the limits of the territorial sea (i.e. within 12 miles from the coast), thereby reducing the availability of tuna to be caught by the local fishers. They are less mobile than their foreign counterparts because their smaller vessels can only fish up to 50 miles from the coast for a maximum of 3 days at sea. Measures to address the problem: The Minister for Fisheries has requested that representatives from the three small-scale fishing organizations make representation to him concerning the proposed plan to license foreign fishing vessels. The Minister is prepared to recommend to the Government that these foreign vessels not be licensed if a sound and convincing case can be made to him to the contrary by the small-scale fishers' organizations. Action: Representatives of the three fishers' organizations have been requested to visit the Minister's office to make their cases to him. The Minister will hear the cases assisted by the Chief Fisheries Officer and a representative from the Attorney General's Office. Time allocation: 1.5 hours of which: 10 minutes is allocated to consultation between each representative of the small-scale fishers' organizations and members; 10 minutes for each of the three representatives to state their positions with respect to the proposed licensing arrangement for the foreign longline vessels; 10 minutes for the Minister to respond to the arguments made by each of the representatives; 5 minutes each for the Chief Fisheries Officer and the representative of the Attorney General's Office to respond impartially and frankly to the representations made by the representative of the three fishers' organizations, and 30 minutes for group participation to comment on the arguments presented by the three representatives of the fishers' organizations and the responses by the Minister, the Chief Fisheries Officer and the representative from the Attorney General's Office. These comments are intended to be positively constructive, taking into account the need to secure long-term sustainability in fisheries.
APPENDIX O COMPOSITION OF THE WORKING GROUPS.
WORKING GROUP 1 ­ Fisheries Management Chair: Members: BROWN Colin DEPAUNE Nicholas FAKALOLO Vilimo MOHIBA Augustine TEAFA Sa'aga Talu HANCHARD Barbara (Ms).
Resource Person:.
WORKING GROUP 2 ­ Fishing Operations Chair: Rapporteur: Members: Resource Person: YANGILMAU Celestine NAVITI William TIHALA Malaki TORIBAU Joseva Lagi SMITH Andrew.
WORKING GROUP 3 ­ Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Developement Chair: Members: TIROBA Gideon FALE Poasi MATE Filimoni ORAK Obichang PASISI Uhotau PONIA Ben.
WORKING GROUP 4 ­ Post-Harvest Practices and Trade Chair: Rapporteur: Members: TUILOA Malakai KWAN Kerryn (Ms) ATTO Lara (Ms) BOAPE George TEBAITONGO Tiemaua RUCKES Erhard.
WORKING GROUP 5 ­ Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management Chair: Rapporteur: Members: PAWUT Lamiller SOLOFA Anama (Ms) HEFFERNAN Ally (Ms) OPU Job RAUBANI Jacob J. Jackson ROI Nooroa TAFILEICHIG Andy TEARO Kintoba DOVEY Liz (Ms).
APPENDIX P DISCUSSION GUIDES.
DISCUSSION GUIDE - WORKING GROUP 1 ARTICLE 7: FISHERIES MANAGEMENT AND TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES NO. 4102 INTRODUCTION The ocean's bounty has long been recognized as an important source of protein for the livelihoods of millions of people. Its substantial economic and social importance is strategic for the worlds growing population. However, the current deteriorating condition of many of the world's fisheries indicates that those responsible for managing fisheries are failing. The responsibility for the arrest and reverse of this trend needs to be assumed by all those concerned with the fisheries sector. Fishers, fisheries management authorities, scientist and those whose activities impact on environment, must accept shared responsibility for the current status of many fisheries and ensure measures are implemented for long-term sustainable fishing. Fisheries management is concerned with the management of human activities in the fisheries sector. It requires interface with many technical disciplines ranging from law, fisheries and social sciences through to economics. It requires that fisheries managers and those responsible for implementing management measures have a range of skills and knowledge to effectively conserve and manage fisheries resources. The fisheries manager is often called on to provide sound and professional advice in the face of limited information and political agendas. There is no universal definition of fisheries management but it is useful to use the working definition found in the technical guidelines developed for the fisheries management section of the Code of Conduct103: "The integrated process of information gathering, analysis, planning, consultation, decision-making, allocation of resources and formulation and implementation, with enforcement as necessary, of regulations or rules which govern fisheries activities in order to ensure the continued productivity of the resources and accomplishment of other fisheries objectives." The overall objective of fisheries management is long-term sustainable use of fisheries resources according to the Code of Conduct104. The objectives of fisheries management can be based on three broad areas:.
102 Technical Guidelines For Responsible Fisheries 4 Supplement 1 relates to the fisheries management section of the Code of Conduct and deals specifically with the conservation and management of sharks. The details of the fisheries management issues in relation to sharks will not be discussed in any detail in this exercise. However, note should be taken of the fact that widespread concern for the consequences of increased shark fishing was sufficient enough that an International Plan of Action for the Conversation and Management of Sharks (IPOA-Sharks) was developed and is supported by the supplementary technical guidelines. 103 FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries. Number 4, part.
104 Article 7.2.1.
Law: National and international laws will state the objectives for fisheries management for example recent international instruments refer to the objective of long-term sustainable use of resources; Policies: These should be based on fisheries management objectives such as local industry development, maximum economic benefits, food security, or rebuilding the resources; Plans: Fisheries management plans should state the objectives and goals for the fisheries being managed. These should be consistent with laws and policies and should be formulated through wider stakeholder consultation, regularly reviewed and involve a system of reporting and accountability. The major challenge for Pacific Island coastal States is to develop the capacity and implement measures that will ensure long-term sustainable fisheries, particularly at national levels. This is necessary so that fisheries resources will continue to: provide a food source for future generations; provide long-term economic benefits; optimize utilization (reduce waste, restore and maintain healthy fisheries stocks); contribute to sound environmental outcomes. At the national levels, Pacific Island coastal States constraints for the implementation of effective management measures within national jurisdictions, and at regional and international levels may include: lack of effective organisation and representation; limited resources, both capital and human (skills and knowledge); little or poor quality data; and lack of political will. Implementing responsible and sustainable fisheries by effective management is a major challenge for small island developing States. Fisheries management principles outlined in the Code of Conduct at Article 7 provides the framework with which, all responsible fisheries managers should be knowledgeable. ARTICLE 7 OF THE CODE Article 7 of the Code is sub-divided into eight areas. These areas are: 7.1 General: Imposes the need for all those engaged in fisheries management to adopt policy, legal and institutional frameworks and measures for long-term sustainable use of fisheries resources. The general principles relate to stakeholder inclusion, regional management and conservation competences, managing straddling and highly migratory fish stock, monitoring, control and enforcement capabilities, control of excess capacity, transparency and public awareness in decision-making and fisheries management measures. 7.2 Management objectives: Reinforces that the overriding objective of conservation and management is long-term sustainable use of fisheries resources. States must take measures to avoid excess fishing capacity, promote responsible fisheries, include the interest of subsistence, small scale and artisanal fishers and adopt ecosystem based and environmentally sound fishing practices and gear.
7.3 Management framework and procedures: Managing fish stocks individually and in geographically isolation is no longer acceptable. States must take into account the whole stock across its entire distribution and adopt compatible measures where stocks are transboundary, located on the high seas, straddling and highly migratory. Cooperation and coordination with regional fisheries bodies in all matters is essential and long-term management objectives need to be backed up with management actions through planning. 7.4 Data gathering and management advice: States and regional fisheries organisations should ensure that timely, complete and reliable data be collected and analysed in support of conservation and management measures for fishery resources. 7.5 Precautionary approach: States should apply the precautionary approach widely to the conservation and management of living marine resources. The absence of adequate scientific information should not be used as a reason for postponing or failing to take conservation and management measures. 7.6 Management measures: The range of measures that States should ensure are operational and continually reviewed include licensing arrangements, monitoring fleet capacity, use of acceptable fishing gear and practices, taking into account traditional practises, needs and interest of indigenous and local people, application of cost effective management measures, minimal impact on associated and juvenile species and measures with which to address the recovery of threatened or depleted stocks. 7.7 Implementation: States sub regional and regional organisations should ensure that effective legal and administrative framework and appropriate sanctions are applicable for violations. Effective monitoring control and enforcement measures, in addition to observer programmes, inspection schemes, vessel monitoring systems and research programmes should all be implemented using cost recovery principles. 7.8 Financial institutions: States should encourage banks and financial institutions not to promote the flagging of vessels in jurisdictions other than of the State of beneficial ownership as a function of loan or mortgage. Technical Guideline No. 4 provides further discussion on the above eight areas of Article 7 with some reference to Article 12 (Fisheries Research), providing suggestions and guidance on how States may approach the implementation of these articles of the Code. Technical Guideline No.4 Supplementary 1 supports the implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks (IPOA-Sharks). It provides technical guidance on the development and implementation of Shark Plans and for the preparation of Shark Assessment Reports. TALKING POINTS Based on Article 7 of the Code and Technical Guideline No. 4, the following questions, inter alia, might usefully be addressed: what policy, legal and institutional measures might governments take to: establish appropriate policy and mechanisms to cater for fisheries management; engage and decide which interests/sectors should be represented (broad stakeholder participation?); how fisheries and fishing community interests can be best represented;.
how the policy/mechanisms should be nationally coordinated - which agency should take the leading role? can existing mechanisms be used/adapted to prevent duplication and to encourage efficiency? what policy and practical measures might be proposed for governments to consider in order to equitable allocation of fisheries resources? what measures might governments take to facilitate greater public awareness of the need for fisheries management? what information should be provided? how should this be provided? what type of data should be collected and analysed? what type of data should be collected? who should be responsible for data collection and analysis? how should stakeholders participate in the process? what mechanisms should be employed to ensure data quality? what type of multidisciplinary research should be encouraged? who should determine research priorities? who should pay for the research? how should stakeholders participate in the process (this is essential if they are going to pay for the research)? what mechanism should be used to disseminate results? what risks and uncertainties underlie fisheries management? what monitoring and compliance systems might be adopted? which agency should have this responsibility? What type of powers should the agency have (e.g. arrest or prosecution of fisheries offences)? how can regional and subregional arrangements be established (contributed) to facilitate cooperation in fisheries management? can existing mechanisms be used (existing regional modalities)? what types of information should be shared on a regular basis and in times of "crisis"? which agency(ies) should be involved in regional consultative/cooperation process? what national commitments are needed to facilitate effective and real regional cooperation? In the context of sustainable fisheries management in Pacific Islands region, assess the importance of the compatible fisheries management arrangements for highly migratory fish stocks and propose policy issues that might be addressed to implement an effective programme for fisheries management nationally.
DISCUSSION GUIDE - WORKING GROUP 2 ARTICLE 8: FISHERIES OPERATIONS AND TECHNICAL GUIDELINE FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES No.1 INTRODUCTION The section of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries that deal with Fishing Operations is one of the most wide-ranging of the Articles. It covers the interface of fisheries management and the Fishing Operations. It deals with the conduct of fishing operations within the context of all other operations that are carried out at sea and the human element side of the industry. This gives an interface into the work of IMO and ILO. Fisheries are carried out on the high seas and in the waters under other countries jurisdiction, so in this respect it has to have an international context. This means the issues of registration of vessels and ownership have to be considered. This includes dealing with the sensitive issues of "Flags of Convenience" and "Open Registers". The structure of the Code is such that it deals with All States, Flag States and Ports States assigning the measures that these states should take in order to control the fishing operations carried out by their vessels. The section dealing specifically with the actual fishing industry deals with the narrower definition of "fishing operations" and the role that the industry has to take. Considering the bad press that the fishing gets from some environmental organizations, a specific section deals with selectivity of fishing gear and how the industry can more selectively catch their target species and avoid the catch of unwanted animals such as turtles, dolphins and birds. There is currently a letter addressed to the publication "Science" that regrets the continuing quotation of 27 million tons of discards by the author of the original report that calculated that figure. The true figure is now believed to be less than 10 million and the reasons for the decline have been given as a) greater utilization of bycatch species in Asia and elsewhere both for aquaculture and human consumption; b) adoption of more selective fishing technologies and methods; c) a decline in the intensity of fishing for some species having high bycatch rates; d) a variety of management actions which prohibit discarding in some countries, set bycatch quotas, impose time/area closures, establish marine protected areas and no trawl zones; and e) more progressive attitudes by fishery managers, user groups and society towards the need to solve discarding problems. Energy is an issue that is usually is not considered in fisheries as the cost is built into the economic costs of fishing. However in many fishing methods the fuel costs are a major component of the costs and if the price of fuel increases above a certain level then the entire fishing operation becomes financially unviable. In addressing these following problems, there are subsidiary levels to each question:.
Is the problem correctly defined?.
Is Government actions justified? and if so,.
Is regulation the best form of government action?.
Is there a legal basis for Regulations?.
What is the appropriate level of Government to take action?.
Do the benefits of Regulation justify the costs?.
Is the distribution of effect across society transparent?.
Is regulation clear, consistent comprehensible and accessible?.
Have all the interested parties had the opportunity to present their views? 10. How will the compliance be achieved?.
Fishing is one of the most hazardous occupations with the fatality rates exceeding ten times the national average in most countries. This fact tends to place a great emphasis on the Conventions of the International Maritime Organization and the International Labour Office as they have the UN mandate for marine safety (including Fishing Vessel Safety and the Conditions of Work and Service respectively). However these organizations tend to concentrate on very large vessels Are there any means whereby the industry can take the initiative in improving the safety in smaller vessels? The selectivity devices that have been used to date tend to have concentrated on trawl devices as these tend to account for the greatest amount of discards and number of charismatic species such as turtles. What are the measures that fishing vessels in the South Pacific take to reduce the amounts of discards and catch of turtles, dolphins and sea birds? Harbours are considered to be places of great pollution with the discharge of sewage from vessels, Washing down dirty fish markets, etc. What measures can be taken to reduce such pollution? Monitoring Control and Surveillance has proved to be a very costly exercise in terms of vessels, aircraft, port inspections etc. Can you suggest means whereby the industry can contribute to MCS to reduce costs? Vessel Monitoring Systems has revolutionized MCS in recent years. Considering that the basic equipment for VMS is merely satellite radio-communications, can you suggest other uses for the VMS equipment on board a fishing vessel? Fish Aggregation Devices and Artificial Reefs have been suggested as a means whereby fishing operations can be made more effective. Are there any other advantages or disadvantages to these ancillary fishing structures in the Pacific Islands and is there a need for them to be licensed? Port State Measures are a new concept in fisheries whereby Port States can assist Flag States to meet their obligations. How could Pacific Islands assist the DWFNs to meet their obligations under the Code? The transshipment of fish or fish products at sea should be regulated to ensure compliance with all conservation and management measures. How can the countries of the region ensure that transshipping operations are monitored? The Code places emphasis on the issue of an "authorization to fish" and the need that all fishing activities should be monitored. How can the local fisheries management authorities in the region meet these requirements for domestic vessels? The concept of rights based fisheries implies that the fishing industry will have to develop the ability to manage certain elements of their own industry.
DISCUSSION GUIDE - WORKING GROUP 3 ARTICLE 9 ­ AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT INTRODUCTION Aquaculture the cultivation of our aquatic resources is a not a common practice amongst the Pacific region where fishing from the wild is the norm. Culture can be done in either freshwater or seawater systems and within a wide geographical extent from the ocean to mountains. There may be multiple purposes why aquaculture activities are performed. It may be for financial gain by raising market bound products. For inland communities in particular aquaculture is also becoming recognised as a potential source of food and nutritional for household consumption. And throughout the Pacific there are various unique social rituals where aquaculture produce may contribute to ­ for example as a gift. The current status of aquaculture is not fully realised. Gross estimates are that the value of production from the commercial industry may be in the order of USD 130 ­ 180 million dollars. The main commodities are black pearls, marine prawns, kappaphycus seaweed and ornamental giant clams, which are exported overseas. Meanwhile inland fisheries and freshwater aquaculture of finfish (tilapia, Tor) and shrimp (Macrobrachium spp) is becoming established as an important artisanal product, sometimes consumed by the household and other times sold or used for social occasions. According to the policy and legislation review of Evans et al, (2003) there are some common elements that need to be addressed in consideration of aquaculture are: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) provision of effective means for allocation of space; provision of statutory rights for sale of aquaculture fish and collection of broodstock and spat; renewable licensing for environmental effects; devolution of monitoring and enforcement of controls; and seafood safety controls.
ARTICLE 9 OF THE CODE Article 9 of the Code is sub-divided into four areas. These areas are: Article 9.1: Responsible development within national jurisdiction: States should take responsibility for ensuring that legislation and policies are in place. Such measures should ensure that aquaculture development does not degrade genetic diversity and cultured species do not negatively effect wild populations. Aquaculture should improve the livelihoods of the local people. Article 9.2: Responsible development within trans-boundary aquatic ecosystems: In localities where water, bays or land may share an ecological interaction, both neighbouring states should try to harmonise aquaculture developments, particularly where new species are introduced. Article 9.3: Use of genetic resources: To minimise the impact of aquaculture on the natural ecosystem, states should make sure that negative impacts from the introduction of new species, effects of diseases and mass culture of farmed organisms are minimised. Where appropriate aquaculture should help rehabilitate endangered species in the wild. Article 9.4: Responsible aquaculture at the production level: Aquaculture should regulate high standards for feeds, pharmaceuticals, chemical inputs, waste disposal and food safety of food products. States should support responsible practices in support of rural communities.
TALKING POINTS Based on Article 9 of the Code, relevant Technical Guides105 and lecture notes the following questions inter alia, might be usefully addressed: what measures should government ought to take to develop their institutional capacity to: - identify and empower national focal points­which agency should take the leading role? - Ensure the accurate and timely collection of national statistics in order to develop policy, legislation and administration? - address loopholes in current strategic frameworks including lack of policy and legislation; - if relevant policies are not in place, can the Code of Conduct serve as interim measure? - ensure that national legislation is tandem with international conventions including soft laws such as the Code and hard laws such as WTO trade standards; - devolve controls to counter a lack of capacity within countries which have scarce resources; what mechanisms should be put in place to allow harmonious aquaculture development such as to: - ensure that lawful conflict resolution takes place; - provide secure property rights over space; - allow renewable licensing of environmental activities; - ensure that safe food standards are complied; - ensure that the collection of broodstock or juveniles from the wild. What elements of the code are of the most highest priority to the Pacific region? - Economic development: responsible development; sharing information; market and trade. - Environmental protection: genetic resources; disease mitigation; endangered stocks; hazardous inputs and wastes; maintaining biodiversity. - Social development: livelihood of local communities; rural communities; community development; human resource development. In the context of sustainable aquaculture in the Pacific Islands region, assess the importance of responsible aquaculture practices and propose policy issues that might be addressed to implement an effective programme.
105 Guideline No. 5 ­ Aquaculture Development and supplement guideline No. 5.1 Good Aquaculture Feed Manufacturing Practice; Guideline No.6 - Inland Fisheries; No.3 - Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management; and No. 7 ­ Responsible Fish Utilization.
DISCUSSION GUIDE - WORKING GROUP 4 ARTICLE 10: INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT AND TECHNICAL GUIDELINE NO. 3.
INTRODUCTION The coastal area - the interface between the land and the sea - brings together two very different, complex and yet highly interrelated ecosystems and is an area that is subject to multiple uses. In the pacific Island context, due to the small size of most islands, the concept of coast in fact really describes the entire island environment. The many different types of activities that take place in these coastal areas of our islands are not necessarily mutually compatible, which can result in conflict between coastal resource users. For example, some of the following human and non-human generated activities are likely to occur to a greater or lesser degree and generate impacts on our coasts: expansion of human settlement; cultural activities; industrial development; effluent discharge; deforestation; wharf and marina and seawall construction; dredging including coral extraction; soil and coastline erosion; tourism; construction of artificial reefs; marine parks; aquaculture, and fishing and processing of catches (including destructive fishing practices such as dynamiting and poisoning). Because of the incompatibility of some of these activities, there is a natural competition among them not only in terms of spatial allocation but also in terms of access to other resources including water, finance and human resources. For example, dredging and deep-water port development will restrict inshore fishing activities. Similarly, tourist development, unless it is based on eco-tourism principles, may adversely affect coastal fisheries and also traditional rights and access.. To minimize space and resource use incompatibility and conflict in the coastal area, careful multisector planning, taking a holistic and comprehensive approach is required and taking into account the needs of all stakeholders and in the Pacific in particular taking into consideration the needs and rights of traditional resource owners. This planning will seek to accommodate and harmonize competing coastal activities, based on agreed priorities with the participation of all stakeholders. The ultimate outcome of this planning process would be a comprehensive Ocean and Coast Management Plan but there are interim cost-effective measures that can be undertaken until resources (human and financial) are available for this type of comprehensive planning process. The overall goal of Integrated Coastal Area Management in the Pacific context is to ensure optimum sustainable use of coastal natural resources, maintenance of high levels of biodiversity, and real conservation of critical habitats, taking into account the economic, subsistence and cultural needs of all stakeholders.
Tangible objectives of coastal management in the Pacific Islands include: sustaining local fisheries (subsistence, artisanal and small-scale commercial); protecting the community from storm ravages; attracting tourists; promoting public health; maintaining cultural ties / practices; maintaining yields from mangrove forests, and preserving coral reefs and associated coastal ecosystems identifying alternative sources of livelihood that may take the pressure off coastal resources The major challenge for governments and coastal managers is to achieve successful coordination of the various economic (including subsistence) activities in the coastal area that will lead to: maintenance of coastal biodiversity; long-term optimal social-economic outcomes; resolution of conflicts, and beneficial trade-offs between sectors. The fisheries sector is often disadvantaged in terms of its representation in the coastal area management planning process because the small-scale fishing communities that characterize the Pacific: may lack effective organization and representation, and be relatively poor compared to other economic sectors where substantial local and foreign capital is available to support development activities (e.g. intensive aquaculture and tourist development). Also, it is not uncommon, despite the importance of inshore fisheries production for food and employment/income for coastal fishing communities, for governments to assign a low priority to the fisheries sector when it is being viewed from a multi-disciplinary perspective and relative to other activities that produce higher returns in terms of pure monetary value. ARTICLE 10 OF THE CODE Article 10 of the Code has four main component areas as describe below: 10.1 Institutional frameworks: The Code stresses the need for appropriate institutional arrangements to: achieve the sustainable and integrated use of resources taking into account the fragility and finite nature of coastal ecosystems; take account of the interests of the fishing sector; adopt fisheries practices that avoid or minimize conflicts with other users in the coastal zone and to put conflict resolution arrangements in place. States are also urged to determine the range of possible uses of coastal resources and to govern access to them taking into consideration the rights of local fishing communities and customary practices. 10.2 Policy measures: States are encouraged to create public awareness about the need for integrated management in the coastal zone taking account of relevant economic, social and cultural factors. Risks and uncertainties should be identified and assessed, monitoring systems adopted, and multidisciplinary research facilitated.
10.3 Regional cooperation: The Code supports regionalization and encourages States to cooperate regionally and sub-regionally in the management of the coastal zone to take into account the transboundary nature of some of the impacts. Information sharing on a timely basis and notification of events is considered a key factor in this cooperative arrangement. 10.4 Implementation: Appropriate national mechanisms should be established to facilitate effective coastal zone planning and that fisheries interests are adequately represented. A key factor is to ensure that national agencies, and the fisheries sector in particular, must have appropriate technical capabilities. The paper provided by SPREP and the Technical Guideline No. 3 which you have in your folder provide further discussion on the above four areas of Article 10, providing suggestions and guidance on how Pacific Island States may approach the implementation of this Article of the Code. TALKING POINTS Based on Article 10 of the Code and Technical Guideline No. 3, and the paper presented by SPREP at this meeting, the following questions might usefully be addressed: what policy and institutional measures might governments take to: establish appropriate policy and mechanisms to cater for coastal management in your country; which interests/sectors should be represented (broad stakeholder participation?); how can fisheries and fishing community interests be best represented; how should the policy/mechanisms be nationally coordinated - which agency should take the leading role? can existing mechanisms be used/adapted to prevent duplication and to encourage efficiency? what policy and practical measures might be proposed for governments to consider in order to install effective conflict resolution and the harmonization of competing interests in the coastal zone? what measures might governments take to facilitate greater public awareness of the need for integrated coastal management and also to ensure broad stakeholder participation in decision making, especially traditional resource owners? what risks and uncertainties underlie coastal management? what monitoring systems might be adopted? which agency should have this responsibility? What type of powers should the agency have (e.g. emergency powers to deal with oil spills etc)? what type of multidisciplinary research should be encouraged? who should determine research priorities? who should pay for the research? how should stakeholders participate in the process?.
how can regional and subregional arrangements be improved to facilitate cooperation in coastal management? can existing mechanisms be used (existing regional modalities)? what types of information should be shared on a regular basis and in times of "crisis"? which agency(ies) should be involved in the regional consultative/cooperation process? what national commitments are needed to facilitate effective and real regional cooperation?.
DISCUSSION GUIDE - WORKING GROUP 5 ARTICLE 11: POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE.
Elaborate on examples for specific action required by Pacific Island countries to comply with relevant provisions of Articles 11 of the Code of Conduct. Which of the provisions are particularly relevant and are they met? 11.1 ­ Responsible fish utilization; 11.2 ­ Responsible international trade, and 11.3 ­ Laws and regulations relating to fish trade.
It would be very useful if this workshop would provide opinions with regard to the need for technical guidelines on Article 11 (Chapter 2 and 3) and if there is one to be developed, what should be the focus (most relevant provisions) and way of presentation.
Discuss implications of the linkage between trade and environment in the light of the Pacific Islands reality (e.g. traceability, ecolabelling).
Discuss implications of the linkage between trade and food security in the light of the Pacific Islands reality (article 11.2.5 and the human right to food). What could be suitable measures to reach the "best" compromise?.
Other issues that may be discussed: Trade measures for enforcement of management measures; Participation in rule making (e.g. WTO negotiations); Comments on priority ratings related to reporting on the implementation of the Code of Conduct. Are the two questions sufficient and meaningful? National conditions for a cooperative approach in the implementation of Article 11: Government ­ producers ­ trades ­ consumers; Needs for research, cooperative arrangements among countries and specific action at national, regional and international levels, and Need for information and technical support and capacity development.
This document contains the report of, and the papers presented at, the FAO Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action which was held in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003. The goals of the Workshop were to facilitate a greater understanding of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries among all stakeholders involved in fisheries in the Pacific Islands; to foster steps towards the more effective implementation of the Code in the region; to encourage fishery policy revisions reflecting the objectives and general principles of the Code and to encourage an inclusive approach to management whereby stakeholders are involved in the development and review processes and the implementation of measures rather than an exclusive process where stakeholders are largely excluded from the processes. In the course of its deliberations, the Workshop addressed the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its framework; legal considerations and issues relating to the Code; responsible fisheries management; responsible fishing operations; responsible aquaculture and inland fisheries; responsible post-harvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. In addition, there was a role-playing exercise concerning making responsible decisions about fisheries. To enhance the participatory nature of the Workshop, five Working Groups were formed. They focused on fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture and inland fisheries development, postharvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. Each Working Group developed conclusions and recommendations. The Workshop endorsed several national, regional and global follow-up actions. The Workshop was funded by the FAO FishCode Programme through Project GCP/INT/823/JPN (SIDS: Responsible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States) and the FAO Regular Programme.
