<title>The conservation and rehabilitation of African lands</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Edouard Saouma - Director-General - Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
African nations face many problems. In the long term, perhaps the most serious is that of land degradation. The African economy depends on the continent's forests, pastures and croplands; all are now threatened with degradation. The importance of this issue was highlighted in the 1986 FAO study African Agriculture: the next 25 years. One of the major recommendations of this study was that a conservation strategy should be developed for the continent.
With the assistance of African experts, FAO has followed up this recommendation. The result is the International Scheme outlined in this publication.
Land can not be reclaimed or conserved through sporadic efforts or short-term projects; what are needed are long-term programmes, backed by sound land-use policies, and strategies to catalyse their development. To succeed, these programmes must be founded on the concept of participation; ultimately, African land can be conserved and rehabilitated only by those who make their living from it.
The purpose of the International Scheme for the Conservation and Rehabilitation of African Lands is to provide a means by which African countries can develop their own programmes to fight land degradation. The Scheme is specifically designed to enable countries to tailor these programmes to meet their individual needs.
Currently, African nations face severe financial constraints and lack enough trained workers and inputs to undertake programmes of the scale required. Fortunately, technical assistance and financing agencies are keen to help - providing they can do so within programmes likely to enjoy long-term success. This Scheme therefore includes a mechanism which enables African governments and these organizations to work in partnership.
I commend this Scheme to governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations. For its part, FAO intends to support and coordinate the Scheme with the vigour and enthusiasm that it merits.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Africa's lands - its croplands, savannah, bush and forests - are under attack. They are suffering from poor land management resulting in rapid land degradation: massive soil loss, falling yields, deforestation, the disruption of water resources, and the destruction of natural pasture. Land mismanagement - whether of arable land, rangeland or forested areas - consists, usually, of removing too much, returning too little and cultivating, grazing or cutting too frequently.
Land degradation is proceeding so fast that few African countries can hope to achieve a sustainable agriculture in the foreseeable future. Droughts combine with falling productivity to threaten food shortages and famines over wide areas. The livelihoods of millions are being put at risk as a result of lower agricultural yields, water shortages, frequent flooding, and a shortage of natural resources such as fuelwood and fodder.
Yet land degradation can be prevented and even reversed. Soil conditions can be improved, and productivity restored. Africa's lands could be made to support many more people, and to guarantee a secure future for the rural population.
This proposal outlines a plan - the International Scheme for the Conservation and Rehabilitation of African Lands - to mobilize local, national and international resources to fight the problem of land degradation. It suggests a new approach designed to capture the interest and imaginations of rural people throughout the African continent.
Part I of the publication outlines the magnitude of the threat. It explains that while most traditional African land-use systems did little harm to the environment, few of them have stood up to the pressures of expanding populations and more intensive land use. Past approaches to this problem were based on physical measures, such as creating mechanical barriers to soil movement. They were expensive and provided few benefits to the land users themselves. They attacked the symptoms of the problem, not the causes. As a result, most were poorly maintained, and fell into disrepair.
The international scheme advocated here is based on promoting sound land-use management principles which, because they produce increased yields and profits within one or two seasons, encourage widespread participation. Physical conservation measures will still be needed, but much greater emphasis will be placed on increasing and maintaining the land's vegetative cover through appropriate agronomic and forestry techniques, and introducing sound management practices. This approach protects the land surface from wind and water erosion, and improves soil conditions by increasing fertility and organic matter content. As soils improve, productivity rises, profits increase and the risk of crop failure recedes.
Part II of this publication describes a framework for national, regional and international action for dealing with land degradation.
In Africa, few farmers have had the time or the means to adapt their methods to today's conditions of land scarcity. Land mismanagement has become widespread. National action is needed to identify its causes and to suggest solutions based on techniques designed both to raise yields and to prevent degradation. National resources must then be used to encourage the widest possible level of participation in these schemes and to develop conservation institutions, at both government and non-governmental level, to expedite national conservation plans.
Increased research and advanced training are among the many requirements to tackle land degradation. These schemes are often best advanced regionally and there are a number of successful precedents for this.
Finally, a mechanism is described to enable nations, NGOs, donors and financing agencies to cooperate in formulating policies and devising programmes that will work efficiently and effectively. Experience has shown that schemes which are controlled by governments but which invite outside participation at a very early stage are the most likely to succeed.
Land degradation, seen here at its worst in the Ethiopian highlands, lends directly to human suffering and misery. Not only is valuable land last to cultivation but topsoil ends up as silt in rivers and reservoirs, causing flooding, damaging hydro-electric schemes and blocking navigable waterways
<section>3</section>
Part I: Facing facts: The threat of land degradation
Lessons from the past
The way forward
LAND USE PATTERNS ARE LEADING TO DEGRADATION, DESERTIFICATION, DEFORESTATION, FLOODING, THE SILTING UP OF RESERVOIRS AND WATERWAYS, AND FALLING LEVELS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION
The FAO study, African Agriculture: The Next 25 Years, stressed that Africa has considerable agricultural potential but that several constraints are preventing this potential from being exploited. If these constraints could be overcome, the continent could produce enough food, fuel and fibre to support a population very much larger than the 500 million people now living there. About 840 million hectares, 30 percent of Africa's land area, is potentially cultivable; less than one-third of this was actually being cultivated in 1980.
Sustainable agriculture at risk
Much of Africa's land base is environmentally delicate and easily damaged. Large areas of cropland, grassland, woodland and forest are already seriously degraded. A major finding of the FAO study was that the basis of Africa's agricultural production - its land - must be protected. Sustainable production, whether of crops, livestock or fuelwood, depends on systems of land use that maintain soil fertility and reduce erosion and other kinds of degradation. Erosion is a natural process that can never be completely eliminated, but it can be greatly reduced. Not until this is done can the sustainable agriculture advocated by the World Commission on Environment and Development (Our Common Future, Oxford University Press, 1987) be achieved.
Traditional solutions
Over the centuries African farmers and pasturalists have developed effective systems of land use compatible with their environments, for example shifting cultivation in the humid tropics and nomadic grazing in the semi-arid areas.
Farmers practicing shifting cultivation would clear an area of forest and then cultivate the land for two or three years. When plant nutrients in the soil were depleted, and crop yields had fallen, farmers would move to a new plot, leaving the old one to regenerate under natural vegetation. It could be 20 or more years before the original plot was cultivated again. In the meantime its fertility would have been restored by the bush or forest fallow, and weeds and pests suppressed.
Nomadic pastoralists traditionally moved with herds of animals to different areas of good grazing and water supply as seasons and conditions changed. With low stocking levels they were able to move to new areas before the reserves of any single area were depleted and the soil laid bare.
"To achieve global food security, the resource base for food production must be sustained, enhanced, and, where it has been diminished or destroyed, restored."
The World Commission on Environment and Development
Our Common Future, 1987
These and other similar systems produced low yields - relatively large areas were needed to support a small population. Problems arose when populations started to increase, and the pressure on land resources became more severe. Unfortunately, new farming systems, which would increase sustainable production, have not been developed in many parts of Africa, and the old systems of land use have been retained. However there is now no longer enough land available to allow long fallow periods; more and larger herds compete for forage; and other traditional systems of land use are being placed under increasing strain.
Farmers have responded by trying to develop new land although most of the best land is already in use and as a result expansion has largely been on to marginal land: steep land, land in areas of uncertain rainfall and land with poorer, erodible soils. In the process, large areas of forest have been destroyed and much traditional pasture put under the plough. Nutrient inputs are far below what is being removed. The nett result is severe degradation.
The threat of desertification
More than one-third of Africa is at present under threat of desertification (see map). On the southern edge of the Sahara some 650000 km^2 of once productive land - an area the size of Somalia - have become desert over the past 50 years. An estimated 50000 to 70 000 km^2 go out of production every year. These changes are worsened by periodic droughts but not caused by them; it is the mismanagement of the land itself that is causing desertification.
Over-grazing is one of the principal causes of desertification. As livestock numbers have increased, vegetation has been stripped from rangelands, and the pounding hooves of hungry animals have turned the exposed soil to dust. A 1986 FAO study estimated that the number of livestock in the Sudano-Sahelian zone increased by 76 percent between 1963 and 1983; the area now contains some 160 million cattle, sheep, goats, horses and camels.
The threat of desertification
Over-grazing also changes the composition of plants in the rangelands. Useless and mildly poisonous plants such as Calotropis procera now infest vast areas of the Sudano-Sahelian belt because they no longer have competition from the nutritious grasses that used to make up the bulk of pasture plants.
In addition to over-grazing, the increasing use of trees and brushwood for fuel, leading progressively to deforestation, has accelerated desertification over much of semi-arid Africa.
Desertification
One result, found particularly in the arid and semiarid regions, is the desertification of land that was once productive and useful. As much as 34 percent of African land is now under threat from desertification (see box). Large areas of good land have al ready been buried by drifting sand, or the exposed topsoil has been blown away.
Desertification can happen quickly, placing large numbers of people at great risk. During the Sahel drought of the early 1970s, nearly one million 'environmental refugees', a sixth of the population, were forced to leave Burkina Faso. Half a million more left Mali.
Deforestation
At present deforestation is proceeding 30 times faster than reforestation. In the early 1980s an estimated at 3.7 million hectares was being lost each year. The destruction of the forests is mainly a result of clearance for agriculture. Both traditional techniques of slash-and-burn agriculture and permanent clearing for modern farms are taking their toll.
The search for fuelwood, as well as the growing frequency and severity of forest and bush fires, are also taking their toll. Deforestation has led to a crucial shortage of fuelwood and building materials in many areas. Crop residues and animal manure, which were previously returned to the soil to add valuable nutrients, are having to be burnt for fuel. At the same time, the ploughing of pasture has forced herders to move further into the marginal areas where their animals destroy the vegetation and land degradation is accelerated.
Effects on water resources
Hydrological conditions over much of Africa are being changed. With less vegetative cover to protect against the impact of raindrops causing surface sealing, less rain infiltrates the soil. Runoff increases, stream flows fluctuate more than before, flooding becomes more frequent and extensive, and streams and springs become ephemeral. These conditions encourage erosion; as a result, sediment loads in rivers are increasing, dams are filling with silt, hydro-electric schemes are being damaged, navigable waterways are being blocked and water quality is deteriorating. The inland fish catch is suffering in many areas. With less water entering the soil and being stored for use during dry periods, crop yields are also falling.
The extent of the damage
FAO studies indicate that more than 35 percent of land north of the equator is affected by either erosion or salinity. Zimbabwe alone could be losing, on average, 1.6 million tonnes of nitrogen and 240 000 tonnes of phosphorus each year though erosion (see box bellow). A 1987 FAO study suggested that sediment in many African rivers is increasing roughly 1.5 times as fast as the populations in their catchment areas.
Thus sediment levels are increasing at approximately 5 percent per year in Nigeria, Tanzania and Zimbabwe, 4.3 percent in the Sudan and 3.2 percent in Tunisia.
The degradation of Morocco's watersheds
Large dams in Morocco currently provide 500 million m^3 of water for household and industrial use, irrigation water for 600 000 hectares and 1 500 GWh of energy a year. Siltation of Morocco's reservoirs is reducing the available water by 0.4 percent - 40 million m^3 - a year. So far, 6 percent of installed capacity - some 600 million m^3 of water, enough to irrigate 60 000 ha - have been lost to sedimentation.
Major reservoirs such as Mohamed V on the Moulouya River - where 10 million m^3 of water are being lost annually - will be entirely filled in by the year 2030; others reservoirs are likely to become useless in as little as eight years. Dam heights on three of Morocco's major dams have already had to be increased to preserve storage capacity.
To maintain current levels of water storage in Morocco now requires the construction of one new reservoir storing 150 million m3 of water every year.
Zimbabwe: the hidden cost of soil erosion
Recent work by FAO on data gathered in Zimbabwe gives an indication of the extent and cost of the soil nutrient lost in that country. In 1986, a computer was used to reanalyse erosion data collected nearly 30 years ago in an important series of experiments conducted at Henderson Research Station in Zimbabwe.
The enrichment ratios, the measure of how much more concentrated a nutrient is in the material removed by erosion than it is in the soil from which it is taken, averaged about 2.5. This means that there is considerable selective removal of nutrients from the soil by the erosion process.
An extrapolation of these findings to national level suggests that erosion carries away an annual average of 1.6 million tonnes of nitrogen, 15.6 million tonnes of organic matter and 0.24 million tonnes of phosphorus. On this basis, the arable lands alone lose 0.15,1.5 and 0.02 million tonnes respectively each year. Nitrogen and phosphorus losses from the arable land were about three times the level of total fertilizer applied in Zimbabwe in the 1984/85 season.
If fertilizers were applied to compensate for these losses, the cost would have been US$ 1500 million per annum in 1985. Thus, the financial cost of erosion per hectare per year varied from US$20 to $50 on arable land and from US$10 to $80 on grazing lands. The implication of these figures is that erosion is a massive "hidden" cost on the economy of Zimbabwe - as indeed it must be in nearly every other African country.
The degradation of valuable bush and woodland as a result of forest fires is now a serious problem in many semi-arid areas.
Prospects of the future
Such conditions lead directly to human suffering and misery. Land stripped of most of its topsoil and vegetation, can produce little even when rainfall is adequate. Whereas in the past, farmers were able to harvest some production even after seasons of low rainfall, now they frequently harvest nothing and there are insufficient reserves of vegetation to carry livestock through poor seasons. This is now the position in Ethiopia, where recent famines can be at least partly blamed on land degradation. Unless the present trend is reversed, many other African countries may soon be placed in the same situation.
<section>4</section>
Lessons from the past
ALTHOUGH SOME TRADITIONAL SOCIETIES PRACTISED SOIL CONSERVATION SUCCESSFULLY, MANY RECENT ATTEMPTS TO HALT LAND DEGRADATION HAVE TURNED OUT TO BE COSTLY FAILURES
Although traditional systems of land use rarely led to rapid land degradation, problems did arise in some of the more fragile areas where large numbers of people were concentrated. Farmers often responded with sophisticated and effective conservation measures that were developed to overcome degradation threats, and to maintain or raise crop and livestock yields.
In southern Ethiopia, for example, the Konso people live in a steep, erodible area subject to unreliable rainfall. Over the years, the Konso have terraced most of their land and developed a complex system of agroforestry and water harvesting. Compost and manure are spread on the fields to maintain soil fertility, while cattle are stall fed. This system (see box below) appears to have worked well until recent times when population numbers became too great for the available land.
Another example of a traditional conservation system existed in the semi-arid areas of southern Burkina Faso and in neighbouring areas of Ghana. There the Birifor people developed a system which includes the use of stone ridges along the contour, small earth dams, the diversion of run-off water, the- use of manure and compost, and cultivation on mounds. This system minimized land degradation and at the same time maintained soil fertility and crop and livestock yields.
Systems such as these have two things in common: they are adapted to their own environmental conditions; and their primary aim is to maintain soil fertility and agricultural yields at a satisfactory level - the prevention of land degradation was seen simply as a desirable side effect.
Conservation in the recent past
Neither traditional systems of using the land, nor the responses of traditional societies to increasingly severe pressures on the land, have been able to cope with the rapid growth of population in Africa for most of this century. Many of Africa's colonial administrations, however, undertook large-scale programmes intended to halt or reduce high rates of erosion.
Typical of these was one launched in Lesotho in the mid-1930s. Over the following 30 years some 400 000 ha of land - virtually all the cultivable land of this small country - was treated: contour banks were built, grassed strips established to halt erosion, small dams erected in the water courses, trees planted in gullies and excessive run-off diverted from cultivated fields. Disappointingly, these achievements have not been maintained by the farmers, who had come to see maintenance as a government responsibility.
The programme Lesotho was typical of many of the large-scale, costly projects of that time. In spite of these efforts, the battle was not won. Vast areas of Africa continued to be eroded and the degradation of the semi-arid region became so serious that a new word, desertification, was coined to describe the gravity of the situation.
Few African governments can afford to repeat the expense of these large-scale programmes of the past. Indeed, many governments appear disheartened by the relatively poor results that past programmes have achieved. It is therefore important to ask why these programmes were not more successful.
What went wrong
The science of land conservation has existed for little more than 50 years. Over this period attempts to control land degradation have been directed mainly at preventing or reducing soil loss. Soil erosion was seen as a physical process, to be controlled mainly by physical measures; it was not recognized as the consequence of the more fundamental problems of incorrect land management and lack of vegetative cover.
Usually, the problem was identified only after the situation had become serious - a new dam had filled with silt, a bridge washed away or a road cut by gullies. By this time, large quantities of topsoil had already been lost and the productivity of the land seriously impaired. Even though the more important issue was loss of productivity, the problem was usually seen as one of soil loss producing physical damage downstream to rivers and reservoirs.
Physical measures designed to prevent or slow down the process of soil loss would then be considered. Plans would be produced which, if properly implemented and maintained, would greatly reduce the rate of land degradation.
The Konso: a traditional solution
The Konso of southwest Ethiopia have developed a complex and sophisticated form of agriculture which has allowed them to subsist in a mountainous area with fragile soils and an irregular rainfall which averages less than 900 mm annually.
Their farming is based on an elaborate system of terracing, a variety of soil and water management practices, and the integration of livestock and forestry with the rest of their agriculture.
Their terraces are built with stone walls to hold the soil in place and protect it from erosion until the crop roots are sufficiently established to take over. The terraces are often irrigated from collecting basins and by diverting runoff water from paths and roads.
On flatter land, the fields are formed into basins with rectangular ridges on an approximate 2 x 4 metre grid. Crop stubble covers the ridges as a protection measure while crops are planted in the basins where water accumulates.
The cabbage tree (Moringa stenopetala), from which young green leaves are collected as a vegetable, is planted together with fruit trees in the cropped fields, with increasing densities on the wetter sites. On steeper slopes, terrace walls are made from double layers of rock, and the space between them is filled with soil and planted with leguminous crops.
A variety of annuals and perennials is sown in staggered or relay-cropping sequences, usually with sorghum, finger millet or maize as the main crop, mixed with beans, peas, lentils, fruit trees, medicinal species, spices, oil seeds, firewood and building-timber species, root crops and cash crops such as cotton and coffee.
Many different species and cultivars are maintained, especially of sorghum, of which more than 23 cultivars have been selected for specific uses, both for tolerance to a range of soil and moisture conditions as well as a range of uses such as baking flour, beer and animal fodder. The latter is particularly important to the Konso, who live in stockaded villages and practice stall feeding of cattle for milk production. The villages contain large reserves of cactus (Opuntia), partly as a standing fodder reserve and partly as a firebreak. Stall feeding permits manuring of the land closest to the village. The fields far from the village receive little manure but are placed under rotations which include fallow periods.
The agriculture practiced by the Konso is essentially for subsistence. Few, if any, cattle are sold as markets are too distant.
Over many generations the Konso have thus developed an elaborate conservation system which includes:
o a range of effective conservation practices such as manuring, mulching, use of trash lines (contour lines of crop residue) and fallows;
o a complex cropping system which includes the use of a wide range of leguminous and non-leguminous plants and trees; and
o a flexible system of land use which can cope with harsh climatic conditions and erratic rainfall.
Elaborate terracing systems developed by the Konso are backed up by extensive manuring, mulching and fallow practices
Most of these plans depended heavily on the construction of bench terraces, contour banks, check dams and similar works. The problems were treated from an engineering perspective; the planners seldom paid much attention to incorrect land management and use, of which surface run-off and soil loss were only the symptoms. Rarely was there any direct contact between the farmer and the planner.
Plans developed in this way hardly took into account the effects they would have on future production or the immediate needs of farmers. They were aimed simply at keeping the soil in place.
A given plan was then explained to the farmers who were encouraged, cajoled, persuaded or even forced to implement it. At this point the problems really began: programmes proceeded more slowly than planned because few farmers had any interest in them or were only prepared to carry out the work if paid to do so. Even fewer were willing to maintain the work unless made to do so.
With land users so marginally involved, it is not surprising in retrospect that these schemes should so often have turned out to be expensive failures. Farmers, pastoralists and those who relied on woodlands and forests for their livelihoods were often regarded as part of the problem, rather than as the potential solution. No attempts were made to analyse the real causes of land misuse, such as land tenure systems, labour shortages and lack of economic incentives, information and advice.
Palm branches stop Moroccan sand dunes:
A simple but effective technology has been developed to halt the spread of sand dunes in southern Morocco. In the mid 1970s dunes were encroaching onto cultivated and settled areas, severely limiting plans for agricultural development. In 1980 a four-year UNDP/FAO project started to investigate methods of sand dune stabilization in the southern provinces.
It was originally thought that the sand came from the Sahara, but the project proved the sand was blown along the ground from the Atlas mountains in eastern Morocco. It was impossible to stabilize the source of the sand, so its encroachment had to be controlled where it threatened inhabited or cultivated areas.
The most effective technique identified was to build palm branch fences of less than a metre high in connecting squares with seven metre sides. Inside these squares the wind was not strong enough to move the sand, and vegetation could be established. Several types of shrubs and trees were tested and bred to improve their resistance to wind and sand.
Fourteen villages, seven palm plantations, and many irrigation canals, roads and railways in the area were protected, and substantial areas of land were reclaimed for agricultural use.
When the project ended, local staff continued the work, and a permanent base for desertification control was established which will benefit the entire north African and Near East region
Palm branches stop Moroccan sand dunes
The scars of erosion extend over vast areas of Lesotho, bearing witness to the failure of large-scale, expensive land conservation programmes of the past. Farmers had few incentives to maintain conservation structures once they were built.
Why conservation schemes often fail
<section>5</section>
The way forward
FUTURE PROGRAMMES TO TACKLE LAND DEGRADATION MUST FIND OUT WHY LAND IS BEING MISUSED AND HOW TO MOTIVATE LAND USERS TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT
Experience in Africa has proved that large-scale, top-down, government-run programmes to treat land degradation are seldom effective. They are also so expensive that probably no African country could now afford a programme of this type sufficiently large to tackle its land degradation problems.
Fortunately, alternatives now exist. Many depend essentially on promoting land-use systems that retain a permanent vegetative cover over the land surface. This protects the soil from wind and water erosion, increases soil fertility, improves the organic content and maximizes water penetration. Crops, grasses or trees grown under such systems inevitably benefit - as do the users of the land who find productivity and profits once again on the increase.
This point is critical because, ultimately, how a country's land is managed and used depends upon the perceptions and actions of its many thousands of individual farmers, pastoralists, foresters and other land users. These people have the ability to bring about fundamental changes in land use. The challenge is to create the conditions that will provide this motivation.
A new approach is needed - one that will ensure the large-scale participation of rural people in conservation because of the benefits it can bring. Governments will still need to take overall responsibility for conservation, but their main role will be to promote the participation of rural people in finding and applying the solutions.
Identifying the causes of land degradation
The first steps are to identify and remove those factors that are responsible for detrimental land use.
Degradation results primarily from incorrect land use and bad land management - from the land being used in a manner incompatible with its capacity. Farmers and other land users rarely deliberately degrade the land from which they have to make a living and feed their families. Incorrect use and bad management of the land are usually the result of ignorance or, more likely, economic, social and political pressures.
The first step is therefore to analyse why undesirable land uses are being practiced. There may be many answers - population pressures may be high, agricultural pricing policies inappropriate, inputs unavailable or land tenure systems may be forcing farmers to over-exploit land. Without an analysis of the underlying causes of land degradation much time, effort and money may be spent in dealing with the symptoms rather than the cause of the problem.
The analysis may lead to the conclusion that the problem cannot be overcome until some major constraint affecting land users is dealt with. This may mean providing outlets for alternative crops, providing some needed farm input or adjusting the land tenure system - subjects rarely considered in the conservation programmes of the past.
For example, an analysis of a badly eroded area may lead to the conclusion that the underlying problem is excessive population pressure on the land. In these circumstances the land is being used beyond its potential capacity, and any programme based only on the introduction of orthodox land conservation practices - no matter how cleverly designed and carefully installed - can have no real hope of success. All these measures can do is slow down the processes of degradation and give those dependent on the land a little more time before they are driven away by falling productivity.
Lasting solutions may involve easing the pressure on the land by relocating some of the farmers or developing alternative sources of livelihood. Even if such solutions are not immediately possible, a sound understanding of the underlying causes of land degradation can prevent governments embarking on costly but unsuccessful programmes.
Stall feeding in Rwanda
With a population of over 6 million and only 2.5 million ha of land, Rwanda is one of the most densely populated countries in Africa. Most of the population is dependent on agriculture but some families now have only 0.2 to 0.5 ha of land to farm.
Rwanda is a mountainous country and with its steep slopes and tropical rainfall the risk of erosion is great.
Under these conditions every effort must be made both to increase agricultural yields and to protect the soil from erosion. A number of systems have been successfully developed to meet these two aims.
The diagram illustrates one of the systems now being widely adopted by farmers with small plots of land. It is based on the idea of stall feeding a cow, or several sheep, to produce manure for composting. Fodder is grown on the banks of the terraces and is fed. together with. vegetable waste, to the animals. The compost is spread on the terraces to increase the organic content of the soil, thereby increasing permeability, improving the soil's water storage capacity, raising soil fertility, increasing yields and reducing erosion.
Stall feeding in Rwanda
Rainwater running off roofs is trapped and stored underground for human and livestock use.
The system is promoted on a "self-help" basis with the government concentrating on providing farmer training and ensuring that essential inputs are available. Similar systems have been developed for other parts of Africa, but many more are still needed.
Involving the farmer
Farmers have to deal with a succession of problems while they strive to earn reasonable incomes, feed and clothe their families, pay off their debts and educate their children. They have neither the time nor the inclination to adopt new and risky practices to tackle processes of land degradation that, on their time scale, are so slow as to be barely discernible.
New conservation programmes must recognize this fact and develop practices that provide short-term, tangible benefits to the farmer. In practice this means increasing yields, reducing risks or providing other direct benefits such as making farm work easier.
There are already successful examples of this approach. In Kenya, "Fanya Juu" terraces have been introduced on cultivated land in some of the lower rainfall areas of the country. This terracing is leading to substantially higher yields of maize and beans. The farmers are adopting this form of terracing enthusiastically and provide all the necessary labour for construction and maintenance. However, the terraces are also effectively controlling run-off and soil erosion. They are therefore meeting the requirements of the nation's conservation programme. The government's contribution consists of technical advice, surveying and laying out the terraces, and providing hand tools and some help in organizing the farmers.
Numerous alternatives can be developed to achieve the twin objectives of providing programmes attractive to farmers while, at the same time, preventing degradation. For example, conservation programmes can concentrate on practices that will improve soil fertility such as returning removed nutrients, increasing organic matter content, preventing the formation of hard pans, reducing soil sealing and improving soil structure. Any practice that can achieve any of these aims will automatically reduce degradation and at the same time increase yields.
With water the limiting factor to agriculture in much of Africa, greater attention must also be placed on the conservation of soil moisture. A number of techniques are already known, and others need to be developed that will help conserve moisture and reduce run-off, thereby automatically reducing degradation.
With this as background, the remainder of this publication is concerned with the specific issues of developing national and regional programmes to tackle land degradation in Africa, and of finding the finance they need.
FAO's World Soil Charter
Adopted by the 21st Session of the FAO Conference in November 1981, the World Soil Charter has been enthusiastically received by FAO member governments. It establishes a set of principles for the optimum use of the world's land resources, and calls for a commitment by governments, international organizations and land users in general to manage the land for long-term advantage rather than short-term expediency.
"La Sénégal tout à l'instar des autres pays se réjouit de l'adoption de cette charte qui revêt un intéret certain dans le processus de développement économique et social du monde. Elle répond en fait a une nécessité urgente de gérer les terres d'une manière rationelle en vue de sauvegarder leurs potentialités de production agricole."
FAO's World Soil Charter
Le Ministre du Développement Rural Senegal
<section>6</section>
Part II: A framework for action
Improving land use
Encouraging participation
Developing national institutions
Catalysing regional programmes
Coordinating international action
A framework for action
The prime responsibility for halting the continuing degradation of land in Africa rests with national governments. Only they can formulate the plans, mobilize the people and implement the projects that are so urgently needed. The following pages outline some of the steps that must be taken to put land conservation on a sound national footing. These steps are not exhaustive but indicate the range of actions required.
Some problems, particularly those requiring advanced training and research, could best be tackled regionally. Pages 34-35 give examples of successful regional cooperation in Africa.
Finally, few African governments will be able to fight land degradation without help from technical assistance agencies and the international donor community. An effective model for ensuring close cooperation between national governments, NGOs, development agencies and donors is described on pages 36-38.
NATIONAL
Three equally important issues require attention in the formulation of a national conservation and rehabilitation plan.
Improving land use
make an inventory of land resources, investigate causes of land misuse, take appropriate remedial action
Encouraging participation
help land users to organize their resources, plan their futures and implement solutions that offer short-term gains
Developing national institutions
create and strengthen the institutions that will be needed to provide land users with the back-up they require
REGIONAL
Catalysing regional programmes
regional networks can provide effective information exchange, advanced training in specialist areas and conservation research
INTERNATIONAL
Coordinating international action
long-term finance can be assured if national governments, NGOs, technical-assistance agencies and financing institutions work together to formulate policies and elaborate programmes
<section>7</section>
Improving land use
THE CAUSES OF LAND MISUSE RANGE FROM INAPPROPRIATE LAND TENURE SYSTEMS TO LACK OF FARM INPUTS. SOLUTIONS MAY MEAN CHANGING AGRICULTURAL POLICIES, INTRODUCING NEW TECHNOLOGIES OR EVEN RELOCATING FARMERS ON NEW LAND
Land degradation is caused primarily by the misuse of land. It follows that an examination of the causes of misuse is essential if lasting solutions to continent-wide degradation are to be found.
Evaluating land resources
Even where information is already available, particularly about soils and climate, other aspects may call for surveys and inventories to be made (see box).
It is at this stage that land-use planning comes into its own. Once sufficient data have been accumulated, it becomes possible to identify areas vulnerable to degradation. These may be priority areas for land rehabilitation. The way is then open to what may be the most important step in the whole analysis - an investigation into the reasons why land is being misused in these areas.
Identifying the causes of land misuse
The most difficult but most important step in the whole process is to identify factors that can be manipulated by government to reverse the process of land degradation and improve land use. A variety of causes may be identified: growing the wrong crop on the wrong land; the land tenure system; the pricing structure for agricultural products; subsidies; incentives; taxes; or even outmoded laws or social customs. Governments may find it difficult to remove some constraints and changes may have to be phased in over a period of time. However, even in the worst situation, where none of the basic changes necessary to overcome the basic problem can be made, it is important that the reasons for the problems be understood. Failure to do so can waste a great deal of time, effort and money.
Improving land use: the options
On the other hand, if governments understand why land degradation is occurring, it may be possible to introduce changes gradually and inexpensively into the agricultural system that will encourage farmers to take up more productive and sustainable forms of land use.
At best, this information will illuminate the strategies required to initiate a new conservation programme. At worst it will prevent countries embarking on new schemes which, because they treat the symptoms and not the causes, are likely to fail. Either way, the results will be beneficial and the options open to countries threatened with large-scale degradation will be clarified.
Implementing the improvements
Reforming agricultural strategies
Agricultural policies have a profound effect on land-use patterns. Decisions to subsidize the production of certain crops or inputs are, of course, intended to alter land-use patterns and to encourage producers to make their contributions in areas where there is an obvious national need. Thus countries with foreign exchange shortages seek to encourage the production of cash crops; those where food imports are high tend to encourage the production of food crops; but where powdered milk or other dairy products, for example, are available cheaply as a result of surpluses in developed countries, dairy production is discouraged.
The introduction of modern inputs, such as fertilizers and seeds, can radically improve land use - the increased yields obtained allow farmers to adopt more appropriate farming techniques that protect tire soil better and put new heart into the land. Land degredation rates then reduce.
These and other measures such as agricultural import restrictions and export subsidies must be carefully analysed to clarify their effects on land-use patterns and rates of degradation. Where the effects are detrimental to conservation, alternative agricultural strategies must be sought.
Land resource data bases and land-use planning
Reliable data on land resources - including soils, climate, vegetation and topography - are needed if sound land-use and conservation policies are to he developed. Some of these data are more widely available than is generally realized. However, the data are usually fragmented, of different scales and reliability and are stored in different ministries, libraries and universities.
The first major task is to find out what data are available and where they are located. The second is to gather existing data together, arrange them in a usable form, assess their utility and decide what additional data still need to be gathered. Even countries which have already carried out a land resources data survey are likely to find that more data of one kind or another are needed.
With computers becoming more readily available and easier to use, it is now possible for any country to establish its own Geographic Information System (GIS) for the assembly, storage and processing of natural resources data. With such a system all relevant data can be stored in one place, added to as more and better data become available and quickly processed into usable forms. All countries should consider establishing their own GIS.
Other more traditional systems of gathering, compiling, storing and processing natural resources data should not be overlooked. As a minimum, each country should establish a small office or operations centre which is given responsibility for recording what relevant data are available and where they may be located.
When sufficient data have been accumulated, they can be used in land-use planning exercises to identify priority areas for land rehabilitation. These areas can then be examined more intensively and strategies developed to improve land-use patterns.
Introducing new technologies
The introduction of new technologies can radically change land use. Better equipment, improved fertilizers and new strains of crops and grasses can all make major contributions. It is now thought, for example, that Vetiver grass (Vetiveria zizanioides) could be invaluable in soil and moisture conservation. The grass, a fire-resistant perennial that grows well in both humid and arid climates, can be planted as a contour hedge to stop erosion and improve water conservation. World Bank studies indicate that it could be used for planting along contours, field boundaries, river banks, gully sides and other waste areas.
New approaches to conservation include techniques that may have been long neglected. Farmers in Burkina Faso, for example, have been taught to construct micro-catchments round trees planted for the protection of sloping land and fuelwood. Upland rice yields of 1 200 kg/ha were obtained in these micro-catchments, with yields doubling during a period when average annual rainfall halved. Elsewhere farmers have made good returns from agroforestry techniques such as alley cropping. Farmers need little persuading to adopt technologies that promise immediate benefits such as these.
Conservation and development: how Lesotho is tackling the problem
how Lesotho is tackling the problem
The government of Lesotho has decided to tackle the country's twin problems of severe erosion and lack of agricultural development through a programme of watershed development. In 1987 FAO was requested to help develop a strategy for this programme.
A small team of consultants and national specialists reviewed the problems and the country's past experiences in the area, and then developed a strategy based on the following elements:
o At national level, government policy (what government wants to happen) is combined with an assessment of the physical resources (what is possible with the given climate and land) to provide a National Plan for Agricultural Development which will be approved at cabinet level. This plan will provide a broad picture of what is wanted and is possible over a time span of 10 to 15 years.
o At district level, the national plan will form the basis for District Agricultural Development Plans where inputs will include a reconstructed agricultural department of field services; the Ministry of Interior District Secretary, District Council and Chiefs; donor inputs to strengthen management; and other appropriate ministries. The District Agricultural Development Plan will be a rolling five-year plan which will be reviewed, revised and updated every twelve months.
o At local level, the District Agricultural Development Plan provides a framework for operational plans prepared on the basis of watersheds or sub-watersheds. These plans will be sufficiently flexible to cover sub-districts, groups of villages or individual villages so that their action areas can be fitted to watershed or sub-watershed boundaries. The involvement of the local community will be an essential feature of planning at this level and village development committees will work with as many individual and informal groups and associations as possible, with the assistance of government officials.
Conservation and development: how Lesotho is tackling the problem
Coordination of funding and donor agencies
This framework of national, regional and community planning should provide the basis for donor activities. Future donor projects and inputs would be the components of an agreed and established long-term programme of soil conservation, whether they were intended to support activities at national, district or community levels. This would give donors a better sense of direction and purpose, and would lead to the more effective use of both government and donor resources.
Encouraging the use of farm inputs
In more than 85 percent of African countries, mineral-fertilizer use is still below 10 kg/ha/annum, in spite of thousands of trials showing that yields can be doubled or trebled by increasing fertilizer usage.
Schemes that encourage the use of farm inputs such as fertilizer, new crop and livestock varieties, integrated pest control measures and mechanization tend to increase production sharply. Increased production takes the pressure off small-scale farmers to use their land ever more intensively. This reduces the chance of the land being misused or the need to cultivate marginal land. Particular attention is being paid to the use of nitrogen-fixing species to increase fertility, and organic matter as an alternative or supplement to the use of mineral fertilizer.
Land tenure
Systems of land tenure often cause the misuse of land, but they are more difficult to alter. An example from East Africa, however, shows how effective a relatively simple legal change can be in improving land use.
Where traditional and secure land tenure systems held sway among the Chaga farmers on Mount Kiliminjaro, trees were planted and soil protected. On Mount Kenya, however, insecurity of tenure led farmers to dig ditches to delineate their plots and to attempt to establish ownership. These ditches, which served as run-off drains, led to severe erosion and gully formation. Huge conservation projects failed to halt the degradation that ensued. Yet today the region is terraced, hedges mark land boundaries, and grassed bunds have been built to reduce erosion.
One reason was that Kenya invested in a land tenure reform programme that vested secure rights in the small farmer. Another was that the courts decided not to accept ditch boundaries as proof of property delineation.
Diversifying rural incomes
One effective way of taking pressure off over-cultivated land is to provide rural populations with jobs and incomes that depend less directly on soil cultivation. In recent years many small-scale projects have shown that rural populations can be successfully provided with alternative incomes through the introduction of activities such as poultry breeding, honey production and fabrication of simple furniture and household utensils from locally available materials.
Relocating land users
Where all else fails, consideration must sometimes be given to relocating land users to areas where degradation is less severe and yields potentially higher. Relocation can bring eventual benefits to those who are moved, as well as new life to the land they have left. Relocation schemes need to be voluntary but should be backed by attractive economic incentives.
There are several areas in Africa where relocation may become necessary. An FAO assessment mission to Ethiopia's central highland area in 1983 reported: "Clearly the land has a finite human carrying capacity... it is doubtful that technology can both catch up and stay ahead of current population growth in the highlands and adequately provide for basic human needs and environmental stabilization. This is an inescapable reality."
Improving land use in Niger's Keita Valley:
marrying old and new technologies
Central southern Niger is badly affected by desertification. In the Keita Valley, where the desert gives way to farmland, the cultures of the nomadic Tuaregs and the settled Hausa farmers meet But population pressures have had dramatic effects on the valley's landscape: less than one-fifth of the province's land is currently cultivable, the rest having been reduced to desert and degraded rangeland. Good land has become scarce and plots fragmented. Trees and scrub have been cut down, leaving the soil exposed to sun, wind and water. When rains do come, they pour down the valley's slopes, carrying away topsoil and the villagers' fields and crops.
Now, however, an imaginative integrated rural development project is helping redress the balance. Carried out by the government of Niger with help from FAO and an Italian trust fund, the project depends on marrying traditional production systems with modern technology. The people of Keita are themselves carrying out the work, checking the results, and maintaining the improvements. The basic technology involved is that of ´´water harvesting" to ensure that water stays in the soil where it falls, rather than running off it to wreak damage elsewhere.
The end result is that trees and crop now grow where a few years ago there were only dunes and rocks. And a new community spirit has been born among the people of the Keita Valley.
<section>8</section>
Encouraging participation
THE BEST PEOPLE TO PLAN AND IMPLEMENT CONSERVATION PROGRAMMES ARE THOSE WHO USE THE LAND - FARMERS, HERDERS AND FOREST DWELLERS. How CAN GOVERNMENTS ENCOURAGE THEM TO DO SO?
Participation is the key to halting land degradation in Africa. Encouraging land users to participate in conservation programmes will not be easy, however, unless those involved can see positive gains in doing so. The first requirement. therefore, is to develop agricultural practices that will simultaneously increase yields, decrease risks or offer other advantages while reducing rates of degradation. In fact, identifying agricultural practices of this type is easier than might be imagined, since conservation farming practices emerge naturally from a re-evaluation of land uses.
Developing short-term benefits
The ideal conservation project is not one where farmers or other land users are paid for their labour, or invited to join a "food for work" programme, but one where they plan and implement their own solutions for their own benefit.
How can such projects best be initiated? First, a practice must be identified that is capable of both increasing profits (or reducing risks) and of conserving land better than is currently the case. For example, it is difficult people to plant and maintain wood lots as they only offer a long-term alternative to scavenging for fuel. But land users respond positively when agroforestry techniques are introduced that allow trees and crops to be grown side by side with little extra work.
Such techniques are often best introduced via demonstration plots. When local people can see how well others are doing, they will often copy without further encouragement.
Encouraging participation: the options
Deliberate conservation measures can also increase profitability. When Rwanda's Parc National des Volcans was created, farmers in the area benefited. Because forests in the area are protected, water conservation is improved and farmers reap crops even during the dry season. They also benefit from employment and income generated from the tourist industry.
Making and using ploughs in Burkina Faso. The introduction of demonstrations, extension work and training programmes in a new technology has prompted widespread participation in a scheme that has effected a major land-use change.
Photo 1
Photo 2
Many of Africa's small-scale farmers are women, many without the same advantages of legal title and access to credit as male farmers. Small-scale schemes that enable female farmers to increase their profitability simply, and to conserve the land at the same time, are therefore likely to be well received.
Organizing land-user associations
It is equally important, however, to ensure that land users are given all the help they need to set up their own organizations. Most rural societies have local associations capable of dealing with day-today issues but these are often not powerful enough, nor sufficiently well linked to district level organizations, to be useful in conservation programmes. Often, encouragement and a small grant are sufficient to turn these embryonic institutions into effective participatory organizations.
Working with the farmer
In its recent publication Land Husbandry: A framework for soil and water conservation, the World Association of Soil and Water Conservation (WASWC) points out that farmers, not planners, are the people who finally decide what will and will not be done on agricultural land. Farmers make rational decisions according to their own circumstances. What they decide is influenced by physical factors, such as soil and climate; the technical advice and assistance available to them; the socio-economic features of their community; and their own personal situation.
The publication stresses that soil and water conservation programmes can be made more effective and acceptable to farmers if the following six points are emphasized:
1. the incorporation of soil conservation as an integral part of any farming system rather than as a separate discipline or activity;
2. the more important problem of soil productivity losses rather than just soil losses per se;
3. the greater importance of rainwater management than of formal soil conservation;
4. the greater significance of biological measures than of mechanical measures in preventing erosion and run-off;
5. the importance of reducing the volume of run-off before attempting to control its flow; and
6. the acknowledgement that action programmes based on bottom-up cooperation between technical staff and local communities are far more likely to succeed and last than those based on top-down planning.
Providing technical advice and training
In many areas, land users are ready and willing to participate in land-use programmes, but they lack the necessary skills. Practical training, sometimes in areas unrelated to conservation, can have remarkable effects on land conservation. In Burkina Faso (then Upper Volta) in the late 1970s, for example, the International Labour Organization supported a village artisan training scheme in which blacksmithing played a major role. Trainees were taught to make simple equipment, including ploughs. Demand for these ploughs soon outstripped supply, and FAO was then asked to help set up animal-powered farming in the country. As a result, many farmers have been freed of the back-breaking toil of cultivating with hand tools. In addition, agricultural land has become more fertile as mixed farming of livestock and crops has replaced arable-only systems. A simpler example comes from Kenya. Cheap nurseries established by local people, coupled with an efficient extension programme, have
succeeded in persuading many Kenyan farmers to plant trees on their farms for fruit, shade, wind breaks and fuelwood. A survey in the Kakamega District of Kenya showed that 72 percent of farmers had planted trees recently and 38 percent were growing seedlings.
Publicizing land-use issues
A national publicity campaign to alert the public - particularly the rural population - to the problems of land degradation and the ways in which they can be overcome is essential to any conservation programme. Good publicity may well hold the key to success in such programmes, which may have to be conducted on a massive scale if hundreds of thousands of land users are to be made rapidly aware of the new possibilities that conservation farming presents.
The campaign should fully exploit the press, radio and even television. In addition, field days and demonstrations should be organized, conservation activities included in school programmes and leading national personalities and politicians should be asked to help stress the importance and value of the national conservation programme.
Publicity in Cape Verde's reforestation programme
Publicity was one of the key ingredients in Cape Verde's successful reforestation programme which began in the mid-1970s. The campaign slogan, widely broadcast on radio and in the press, was "Plant, plant, plant. Don't cut the trees ... plant a million trees ". Photo on right shows a school child transporting a sapling to be planted out.
Publicity in Cape Verde's reforestation programme
Helping organize user associations
Fighting the battle for Ethiopia's highlands
Probably the largest-scale physical reclamation of eroded land in Africa took place in Ethiopia during the 1970s and 1980s. Following the drought of the early 1970s, the country's central highland plateau was badly hit. With assistance from the World Food Programme, the Ethiopian government mounted a "food for work" project, providing each worker with 3 kg of grain and 120 g of vegetable oil for each day worked. Thanks to FAO/UNDP training programmes, the initial project turned into a multi-agency, multi-donor effort in which the physical landscape was altered on a massive scale.
In the first 12 months of 1980 alone, more than 34 million working days were completed. By the end of 1982 nearly 150 000 ha of agricultural land had been terraced, 70 000 ha of land reforested, 30 000 fruit trees planted and 4200 km of roads and 400 irrigations ponds constructed.
One of the secrets of the success of the programme was the existence of Ethiopia's Peasant Associations - local-level organizations of farmers which command strong loyalties. The second stage of the programme successfully trained the heads of 18 000 Peasant Associations in conservation techniques. Since each association comprises hundreds of families, this programme mobilized a vast work force.
In the long run, however, problems have arisen because local populations have become dependent on food aid, and lost self-motivation to improve their farms. This experience has highlighted the need to identify land-use systems that provide economic incentives for farmers to adopt techniques that will both increase their yields and protect their soils.
Encouraging participation in Lesotho
Lesotho's 9 000 village communities are proving critical to conservation attempts in that badly eroded country. To encourage participation in land-use planning exercises, village chiefs and an elected village development committee are used to organize meetings, many of which are characterized by the use of popular theatre - with the villagers as the actors - to air conflicts and discuss decisions.
Agreements on planning are signed between the village development communities and government agencies. Local districts are responsible for implementing the plans, with the goal of handing over management of the programmes to the local communities within five years.
Dam construction in Lesotho
Zimbabwe: participation and land reform
A new programme, the Communal Areas Management Programme for Indigenous Resources (CAMPFIRE), is being developed in Zimbabwe to help ease the transition from communal ownership of land to more formal structures.
Communal ownership of natural resources such as land, water and wildlife is the traditional system of property allocation in most of Africa. It is effective where resources are plentiful and populations small. In Zimbabwe, however, these resources are declining and differing forms of ownership are evolving to counter the resulting shortages.
The CAMPFIRE programme is designed to smooth this transition. Initially CAMPFIRE will set up an institutional structure to enable local cooperatives to develop management schemes for land use, wildlife, forestry, grazing and water in specific areas, and to maximize returns from them. Voluntary community-based cooperatives will be formed to manage these resources and establish a more equitable allocation of profits than previously existed.
Target areas for the programme are remote communal lands on the periphery of Zimbabwe where rainfall is low and soils are poor. Such areas cover approximately a third of the country and support some two million people. They contain only limited arable areas. The best use for the rest is wildlife management, which could offer considerable benefits. The project's aims are to make the communities living under harsh environmental constraints less vulnerable and more self-reliant.
One country, Kenya, is already doing an excellent job of publicizing its conservation programme with the President taking a leading role and participating, in person, at demonstrations on specie: days dedicated to conservation. The President Rwanda is also heading a similar initiative.
<section>9</section>
Developing national institutions
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS IN FUTURE CONSERVATION PROGRAMMES WILL BE TO PROVIDE LAND USERS WITH THE BACK-UP THEY NEED TO PLAN AND IMPLEMENT THEIR OWN LAND-USE PROGRAMMES
Africa is a vast continent, with more than 50 countries covering a large range of environmental conditions, cultures, political systems and economies. It is therefore impossible to produce a conservation blueprint that can be applied without modification to all parts of the continent.
Furthermore, there are no ready-made solutions and no African panaceas. If the problems of land degradation are to be overcome, each country must develop its own conservation strategy, policies and programmes, and tailor them to its own unique circumstances.
Nevertheless, the general principles for the control of degradation remain the same for all countries: if governments are to provide the back-up services that land users urgently need to plan and implement their own solutions, they need to attend to a number of key areas. These include strengthening and rationalizing relevant government institutions, establishing an advisory system, as well as attending to the legislation, training and research needs of the conservation effort.
Developing national institutions: the options
The advisory commission
A committee or commission is nearly always needed to advise on the detailed formulation of conservation strategy, the development of policy, the coordination of activities and the monitoring of progress. Such a committee normally consists of senior government officials and representatives from different areas of the country and from special interest groups such as farmer associations and grower cooperatives. It should also include representatives from the government departments responsible for macro-economic policy and budget allocations. This helps to ensure both the amount and the continuity of financing needed in the battle to halt land degradation.
The committee should be formed initially to develop strategy and policy, but it should remain in existence to monitor progress, help revise and reformulate policy where necessary, and ensure coordination between the different government departments, non-government organizations and farmer organizations involved.
Committees of this type already exist in some African countries. The Permanent Presidential Commission on Soil Conservation and Afforestation in Kenya, for example, was established in 1981 and is made up of members representing different regions of the country. The Commission's functions include promoting conservation and afforestation, monitoring progress and coordinating the activities of the different organizations involved. This Commission is supported by a small secretariat that includes specialists who can advise the members on technical issues. The Commission reports directly to the head of state and so exercises considerable authority. The Commission has proved particularly effective in creating public awareness of conservation issues.
Strengthening government services
There are many differences in the way nations organize their conservation services. Most French-speaking African countries have in the past given responsibility for conservation to their forestry departments. Others, such as Lesotho and Kenya, have separate conservation units as major parts of their ministries of agriculture. Others combine conservation with forestry, land-use planning or watershed management. In Ethiopia, for example, the Department of Community Forestry and Soil Conservation in the Ministry of Agriculture deals with conservation. In Tanzania, conservation is the responsibility of the Land Use Planning Section of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development.
There are advantages and disadvantages to all these arrangements. It is for each government to decide which arrangement best suits its needs. However, it is important that each country has one clearly defined government ministry, department or unit with overall responsibility for conservation and with the authority to coordinate.
Few African countries currently have the necessary finances or trained personnel to provide all the services needed. Compromise is therefore unavoidable if a realistic programme is to be developed within the limitations of available resources. Continuity is important. It may be preferable to start with small numbers of staff, limited facilities and modest budgets than to embark on an ambitious programme which cannot be maintained and which may have to be cut back or abandoned in the future.
Technical training, for local people and extension workers, is one of the many requirements that necessitates improved government services. Technicians will require training not only in conservation techniques but also in methods of encouraging participation among local populations
Encouraging the work of non-governmental organizations
In the past few years, NGOs have produced results in small-scale rural projects out of all proportion to their normally modest funding levels. Working at grassroots levels, NGOs can often involve farmer and village organizations in their activities in ways that are impossible even for local government departments. NGOs should be given important roles in government strategies to tackle land degradation and improve land use.
Preparing a sound legal base
Many of the large-scale programmes undertaken during Africa's colonial period were imposed by the administrators on the farming communities, often with the help of new laws introduced to force farmers to comply with conservation programmes. Harsh penalties could be applied and farmers who did not carry out the required work were fined or jailed.
Not surprisingly, conservation became extremely unpopular in many parts of Africa. In East Africa the conservation laws were used as an issue in the lead-up to independence; local politicians encouraged farmers to break these laws as a means of expressing opposition to the colonial administration.
Unfortunately, this led to the idea that soil conservation laws are counterproductive and best avoided. In fact, legislation can offer governments an important tool in promoting conservation. Most countries need legislation to make conservation work - to establish the necessary government institutions, to legalize their mandate and to ensure that they receive a regular budget.
A thorough review of all relevant legislation is an essential element of a national conservation strategy. Particular attention must be paid to the harmonization of existing legislation which may thread its way through manifold government departments and ministries.
Personnel and training
Personnel requirements, training needs and facilities will need reviewing. Three key points need constant emphasis:
o technicians need training not only in conservation techniques but also in how to involve rural communities in developing their own plans and timetables for conservation;
o farmer training courses should incorporate conservation, which should not be taught in isolation or as a separate subject;
o short seminars for administrators should be held to sensitize them to conservation and to stress the important role that they have in national programmes.
A national soil conservation strategy for Tunisia
Tunisia is particularly susceptible to soil erosion. Recent estimates show that three million hectares - some 18 percent of the country - is subject to serious or moderate erosion.
The problem is not a new one to Tunisia. Erosion was recognized as a problem by the Romans who, some 2000 years ago, constructed extensive systems of terraces and drains in their efforts to transform the region into the granary of the Roman Empire.
Since independence in 1956 the Tunisian government has given high priority to the control of land degradation. A number of different approaches have been tried; at first conservation was handled in the Ministry of Agriculture by the Division of Water Resources and Rural Equipment. Then the service was transferred to the Forestry Directorate. To meet growing national needs, a separate, autonomous Directorate of Water and Soil Conservation was established in the Ministry of Agriculture in 1983.
A long-term national programme has subsequently been developed under which water and soil conservation are recognized as essential components of all rural development projects. Provision is made to protect and extend the useful life of dams while conservation activities are being used to create rural employment.
The programme envisages the expenditure of approximately US$230 million between 1987 and 2000, and aims to cover 600 000 ha of watersheds and 400 000 ha of cereal-growing areas.
The objectives of the Tunisian Water and Soil Conservation Directorate have been defined as:
o reducing the current rate of loss of arable land, some 10 000 ha annually;
o maintaining soil fertility in order to avoid a decrease in productivity;
o retaining the 500 million m3 of run-off which are currently being lost;
o recovering arable land by establishing infiltration structures in the south of Tunisia;
o improving the life span of dams, which are currently silting up at a rate of 25.8 million m3 per year;
o reducing flood damage to valleys and plains;
o implementing a new farming policy which aims to use anti-erosion techniques to increase productivity; and
o creating job opportunities and improving the incomes of rural people in the marginal areas.
The Tunisian government has thus recognized the need for sound, long-term planning in conservation and the necessity for establishing a strong conservation service with a clearly defined programme and objectives.
A national soil conservation strategy for Tunisia
Identifying research needs
More research, particularly adaptive research, should be conducted in African countries so that conservation services can produce packages of conservation measures that are appropriate to local conditions and which can be easily integrated into the local farming systems.
Research is badly needed into some of the traditional African conservation systems, such as the terracing and agroforestry system developed by the Konso in southern Ethiopia, and the pit and mulching system of the Matengo of southeast Tanzania. It may be possible to adapt or modify some of these systems to meet present-day requirements.
Once research priorities have been identified, it is necessary to consider whether they are best conducted nationally or regionally. A few African countries have scientific centres of excellence where such research can be profitably carried out. Most, however, find it more efficient to get regional networks to investigate conservation issues that are common throughout a region.
Developing conservation programmes
Typical national conservation programmes need to be developed at three levels.
1. At the national level government policy is combined with physical, social and economic data to produce a national conservation programme for the next 10 to 20 years. This programme is published as an official government document and incorporated in the national development plan, where it forms a framework for subsequent legislation, administrative action and budgeting for conservation.
2. At the district or province level more specific and detailed programmes need to be developed, based on the national programme, often in the form of rolling five-year plans, which can be reviewed and updated annually. An important feature of these programmes is the identification of the specific inputs of different government and donor agencies.
3. At the local level programmes must be tailored to the individual requirements of the community (the village or some other lower administrative level) and developed in collaboration with the communities themselves.
In some countries, mechanisms already exist - such as the Village Development Councils of Lesotho and the Peasant Associations of Ethiopia - to ensure the participation of local people in soil conservation programmes. Where such mechanisms do not exist, they have to be developed.
Government agencies can assist local communities in preparing their own programmes, which are then referred back to the district level for approval before implementation.
<section>a</section>
Catalysing regional programmes
LONG-TERM TRAINING, INFORMATION EXCHANGE AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ARE BEST EXECUTED THROUGH REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL PROGRAMMES
Regional and subregional programmes provide African countries with a chance to benefit from the experience of other countries in land conservation. Fortunately, several well-established regional organizations already exist, such as CILSS, SADCC and AFRENA, and FAO plans to work with them in developing regional conservation and rehabilitation programmes. Two areas in which such programmes are particularly needed are training and research.
Training for conservation
There is a pressing need for several types of conservation training that are beyond the resources of most African countries. For example, long-term training of technical staff at advanced levels and short-term training of middle to senior level staff in specific subjects are difficult to obtain in most African countries.
To date, Africans requiring advanced training in conservation have been sent overseas, usually to Europe or North America. However, overseas training is expensive and far fewer people can be trained in this way than are required to meet the needs of the continent. Furthermore, many Africans have found their overseas training to have little relevance to the problems and environments of their own countries.
In 1987 the Department of Agricultural Engineering at the University of Nairobi introduced a two-year MSc course in soil and water conservation with the assistance of the Swedish and Dutch governments. If this course can be expanded, it could cater for the requirements of a number of the English-speaking countries of Africa. However, overall requirements for training at this level need to be assessed and, if necessary, the possibility of developing similar courses at other universities explored. There is currently no comparable training in French-speaking Africa, even though such a course is badly needed.
The SADCC soil conservation programme
Soil erosion is one of the major problems facing the nine member countries of SADCC.
To confront the problem SADCC established the Coordinating Unit for Soil and Water Conservation and Land Utilization Programme in 1985. With headquarters in Maseru, Lesotho, the unit promotes and coordinates conservation activities within (he SADCC group. It receives technical and financial support from the Swedish aid organization SIDA.
Since its inception, the unit has been active in a number of areas. particularly in organizing workshops and training courses. Subjects covered to date include cost/benefit studies for soil and water conservation projects, land degradation and desertification control, conservation project design, the history of soil conservation in SADCC countries, a methodology for erosion hazard mapping, training and work force resources development, and monitoring systems for environmental control.
Studies are being made of the extent and severity of erosion while research has been initiated in Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique and Tanzania to assess the effects of erosion on soil productivity.
Soil conservation workers in the SADCC countries are kept in touch with each other through a newsletter, Splash, produced three times a year. This keeps readers abreast of developments in soil and water conservation, and provides a forum for SADCC conservationists to exchange views.
The SADCC unit is an example of regional cooperation which could be followed by other groups in Africa.
Regional and subregional training facilities for short courses and middle-level training are also needed. The SADCC programme caters for some of this need and there is a short course in Malawi run by the Ministry of Agriculture's Land Husbandry Branch. In addition, organizations such as FAO and USAID have helped run ad hoc training courses in several areas. FAO has also supported an arid-zone network in the CILSS countries that has organized training in sand dune stabilization and dry land afforestation.
These efforts have been useful but have provided only a fraction of the training needed. Initially, at least, two centres are required - one for French speakers and one for English speakers - which could provide regular short to medium term training in different aspects of conservation.
Research on land degradation
There has been little recent research on African land degradation and conservation practices. As a result, most of the conservation practices and techniques now being advocated have been developed in other parts of the world.
Some of these techniques have been cleverly adapted to local conditions. For example, the idea of contour banks has been used to develop the Fanya Juu terrace in Kenya - a bank built on the contour but constructed from the lower side and topped up as a bench terrace develops. However, attempts to adapt other techniques, such as graded banks and artificial waterways, have not been successful on small peasant farms on steep slopes.
Better systems of cropping and agroforestry could be developed and used on the steeper slopes being intensively farmed in East Africa. Valuable research is now being undertaken on this problem by ICRAF and IITA, but more work, particularly in applying the results of some of the more basic studies, remains to be done.
Research is often expensive and time consuming. Fortunately, research efforts can often be pooled by a number of countries that share similar conditions and problems; the results of such research can also be publicized by establishing simple research networks.
For example, little is currently known about the quantitative effects of soil erosion on productivity. FAO and SIDA are now helping several African countries establish systematic trials on the subject. Information networks based on newsletters are being used to keep research workers in different countries in touch and funds are being made available by donors to assist the participating countries. Other research priorities now need to be identified and similar networks established to reduce costs and to spread the results.
Research organized in this way can give rapid results and yield widespread benefits. Donors see the support of such efforts as an effective way of giving assistance.
Regional rehabilitation for west Africa's 'water tower'
The mountainous area of Fouta Djallon - the "water tower" of west Africa - is entirely contained within Guinea yet the rivers which originate there provide water for many west African countries. However, land degradation and forest felling in the area began to affect water supplies in neighbouring countries many years ago.
The importance of managing this area resulted in a number of regional projects aimed at protecting the land and rivers. Detailed maps of the Fouta Djallon were drawn UP recording physical and human factors such as climate, land use, susceptibility to erosion, and human and livestock densities. These maps have been used to assess the constraints and potential of the area.
During the recent dry periods, the Guinean authorities have initiated watershed rehabilitation and tree-planting projects to protect watersheds in the Fouta Djallon area. These have been well received by farmers in the area, who are well aware of the need to protect the water supply. The introduction of forage shrubs has meant that cattle rearers have a food supply for their animals in the dry season.
The Fouta Djallon region supports some 1 million people, more than a quarter of Guinea's population. If regional projects in the area are to be successful, and the water sources of nearby countries safeguarded, it is vital that the confidence and participation of local people is effectively secured.
<section>b</section>
Coordinating international action
WHEN THE DONOR COMMUNITY AND NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS WORK TOGETHER TO
FORMULATE POLICY AND ELABORATE PROJECTS, THE RESULT IS AN INTEGRATED PROGRAMME THAT IS LIKELY TO OBTAIN LONG-TERM FINANCING
Few African countries are in a position to control or prevent land degradation without the support of non-governmental organizations, technical assistance agencies and international financing institutions. Fortunately, there are precedents for managing international schemes of this type
The first requirement is that governments commit themselves to the long-term policies, programmes and financial requirements that can bring about sustainable forms of land use and agriculture.
Secondly, governments must meet with donors, NGOs and technical assistance organizations to develop plans, programmes and individual projects. This is necessary because few African countries have either the financial resources necessary to meet the required levels of commitment or the trained people needed to overcome their problems of land degradation unaided.
Coordinating international action
Many financing institutions, donor organizations, technical assistance agencies and NGOs are ready to help if asked. Such assistance can best be provided if governments and assistance agencies work closely together in developing a long-term programme. By making its ideas and requirements known from the start, a government stands a better chance of obtaining what it really needs - be it equipment, the training of staff, finance or other inputs - over a long period in a systematic and orderly way.
For their part, technical assistance and funding organizations welcome the opportunity to help formulate overall programmes. By doing so they can identify where and how their inputs can best be used and they can select and develop individual projects designed to fit together in an overall national programme.
The way in which the scheme will work is illustrated on the facing page. First, a government asks FAO for help in joining the scheme. A report - an issues paper - is made on the major issues, including recommendations on how to mount a review mission comprising national experts and representatives from the donor community, non-governmental organizations and other agencies.
Such missions usually comprise 6 to 12 people and may take up to six months to complete. They are provided in advance with background information on the country's land resources, and supporting documentation on related issues such as the effects of present legislation and land tenure systems on land use. From this information, and from investigations carried out in situ, the review mission prepares a country assessment consisting of a set of land conservation and rehabilitation policies, programme strategies and future projects. These are carefully harmonized with those that exist in the country's National Economic Development Plan, the National Desertification Plan if there is one, the National Conservation Strategy, the Tropical Forestry Action Plan, World Bank environmental country assessments, FAO's own Special Action Programmes as well as existing land conservation projects.
Governments use the country assessment to formulate the official national action plan. This plan is usually launched at a national ministerial seminar and receives the personal approval of the Head of State.
The flow chart illustrates the principal steps involved for a country embarking on a land conservation programme. Once this is established, individual projects can be developed - and financed - as the building blocks of the programme.
Flow chart
The government then calls a round table meeting between donors and technical assistance agencies. This is the crucial step, for it is here that the projects initially identified by the review mission are presented to the international aid community. Many are likely to attract funding at this stage. FAO's experience with this type of round table meeting suggests that perhaps 50 percent of the projects tabled at the meeting may find financing there and then. Most of the remaining projects are financed during subsequent meetings after ideas have been formulated in greater detail. FAO Investment Centre support may also be needed at this stage to prepare feasibility studies for submission to those financing agencies that have committed themselves to the national programme.
The benefits of joining the international scheme
The potential benefits of developing and implementing a land conservation policy in this way are great. All those who should be involved in the scheme are brought in from the beginning; hence they are fully briefed, and aware of how the policies and projects are developing. Participating nations stand to reap many benefits. The overall objective, of course, is to prevent or slow down land degradation so that sustainable agriculture becomes a practical possibility. But many other important social and economic goals are likely to become more attainable in the process:
o farming risks are reduced and farm incomes increased;
o food security is improved;
o fuelwood supplies become more copious; migration to towns and cities is reduced;
o the quality and quantity of water supplies are improved;
o flooding in valleys and coastal areas is reduced;
o the effective life of irrigation and hydroelectric dams are increased; and
o improvements in the general environment lead to higher living standards.
In an environment where changes of this nature are occurring, governments will find they can make better and more efficient use of their limited human and financial resources. They will also be able to use external assistance in a more effective and coordinated manner. The International Scheme for the Conservation and Rehabilitation of African Lands is a natural outcome of the African crisis of the past decade. It provides African nations with a sound means of investing in the future of their greatest resource: their land. And it provides the international donor community with an opportunity to contribute to carefully planned, long-term programmes that will have lasting impact.
The players... ...and the benefits
This publication was designed and produced by Words and Publications, Oxford
